Keynote 1

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Forward to the Past:
Notes towards a Pre-history of Web Search
Stephen Robertson

stephenerobertson@hotmail.co.uk
representation of the pointed-to page this, by contrast, represents
an opportunity that did not really exist in other environments. (A
fourth major advance, deriving from the exploitation of searcher
behaviour as reflected in search logs, lies outside the scope of my
pre-history.)
This talk is not a history: that would require a lot more gathering
and reconciling of evidence than I am able to do. But I would like to
put on record my understanding of this period of IR history (which
I have lived through, been part of, and very much enjoyed), and
provide some anecdotal evidence that may help a future historian.
I will start by briefly reviewing two books which cover web search
but which (in my opinion) have a too-limited view of the history.

ABSTRACT
To me, an awareness of history is a fundamental requirement for
progress; and I believe that we in the field of information retrieval
are currently ill-served in this domain, or at least not as aware as
we should be. While it is true that a researcher in IR is expected to
acquire some knowledge of what has gone before, this knowledge is
typically fairly narrow in scope. There are some IR researchers who
regard IR as a branch of computer science, for example, despite
the fact that the field has a long and venerable history entirely
outside the domain of computers, as well as a considerable current
presence in academic departments well away from CSDs. Outside
of our immediate community, there is a widespread belief that web
search engines arose out of nothing, a totally new invention for
the totally new world of the web.
This is unfortunate. It is true that there were huge changes in
the information retrieval world in the second half of the twentieth
century. The ideas, methods and systems that were around in 2000
(particularly the early web search engines, up to and including
Google) seem at first glance to be completely different from the
ideas, methods and systems that were around in 1950. But these
developments involved in large measure the usual process of evolution rather than revolution, and the usual mix of steps large or
small, forwards or backwards or sideways. Some of these steps
were taken in the world of IR research, and some in the domain of
practical commercial systems.
One of the real achievements of the web search engine world
was to marry the basic technologies of large-scale inverted files
and free-text indexing (which had been developed commercially
over the previous two or three decades) with the ideas of natural
language queries and search output ranking. These last had up to
that point had been largely confined to research systems. However,
it is important to be clear that the search engines did not invent (nor
even re-invent) search output ranking they adapted and developed
it, and added new evidence. I believe this fact is very clear to the IR
research community, but not at all outside. But the histories of all
three (free-text indexing, natural language queries, and ranking)
are worth some further attention.
Another real advance was the discovery of web pages by crawling although spiders were not invented exclusively for web search,
that was their major raison d’tre and the major stimulus to their
development. This represents a necessary function that simply
did not exist in most pre-web search environments. A third was
the extraction of anchor text from incoming links, to improve the

Short Biography
Stephen Robertson has been researching in the field of information
retrieval since 1968, and has been publishing since 1969. He is currently
retired from full-time work, but remains Professor Emeritus at City University of London, Visiting Professor at University College London, and a Life
Fellow at Girton College Cambridge. His previous employment includes
five years at University College, twenty at City University, and fifteen at
Microsoft Research Cambridge. In 1981 he received a Fulbright Award and
spent some months at the University of California Berkeley. He won the
Gerard Salton Award in 2000 and the Strix Award in 1998; he is an ACM
Fellow. His main areas of research have been the evaluation of IR systems,
particularly evaluation metrics, and probabilistic models. The latter led him
in the early 1990s to invent the BM25 ranking function, which remains a
benchmark for effective ranking of search results.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’17, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan
© 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). 978-1-4503-5022-8/17/08. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3077136.3080643

1

1

