Short Research Paper

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Evolution of Information Needs based on Life Event
Experiences with Topic Transition
Naoto Takeda

Yohei Seki

University of Tsukuba
Tsukuba, Japan
s1621623@u.tsukuba.ac.jp

University of Tsukuba
Tsukuba, Japan
yohei@slis.tsukuba.ac.jp

Mimpei Morishita

Yoichi Inagaki

kizasi Company, Inc.
Tokyo, Japan
mimpei@kizasi.jp

kizasi Company, Inc.
Tokyo, Japan
inagaki@kizasi.jp

ABSTRACT
We propose a method to clarify the evolution of users’ information needs related to a user’s interests and actions based
upon life events such as “childbirth.” First, we extract topic
transitions using dynamic topic models from blogs posted by
users who have experienced life events. Next, we select the
topics by computing the diﬀerences in topic probabilities before and after the life event. We evaluated our method based
on three life events: “childbirth,” “finding employment,” and
“marriage.” Our method selected life event-relevant topics
such as “child development,” “working life,” and “wedding
ceremony.” We found mothers’ information needs such as
“how to introduce baby food,” employees’ information needs
such as “preparing an induction programme,” and couples’
information needs such as “wedding reception planning” in
each topic.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems → Web and social media search;

KEYWORDS

“losing a job” [3] using the users’ social media posts. In these
studies, however, the analysts must specify the interests or
actions about the life events in advance. In this paper, we
propose a method for extracting topics relevant to life events
and their transitions.
Our method uses dynamic topic models (DTMs) [1] and
blog posts from users who have experienced a life event to
extract the topics and their transitions. We select the topics
by computing the diﬀerence in topic probabilities before and
after the life event. Accordingly, the analysts1 can provide information relevant to the life event at appropriate times. For
instance, many new mothers become interested in child development after the “childbirth” life event. With our method,
analysts can find trends of information needs such as “how to
introduce baby food” or “usage of early development toys”
in “child development” topic to provide supportive information timely for new mothers. We demonstrate the generality
of our method by applying it to multiple life events. We also
verify that our method can clarify the evolution of information needs by analyzing the chronological evolution of words
in topics.

Life event; DTMs (Dynamic Topic Models); Information needs

2 RELATED WORK
2.1 Users’ Actions in Life Events

1

Choudhury et al. [4] analyzed the changes in user’s actions
of “marriage engagement” with Twitter posts. They clarified that the number of postings about “wedding planning”
or “enjoyable activities (couple-centric)” increased after “engagement”. Burke et al. [3] focused on the “losing a job” experience and analyzed the changes in users’ activities on Facebook. They clarified that Facebook communications were effective in helping users find a new job and relieving their
stresses.
In these studies, however, the analysts must specify his
or her interests or actions about the life event in advance.
In this paper, we propose an extraction method for topic
transitions that reflect the evolution of the users’ interests
or actions in life events by computing the diﬀerence in topic
probabilities before and after the life event.

INTRODUCTION

Users’ interests and actions evolve as they experience life
events such as “childbirth,” “finding employment,” or “marriage.” We propose a method to clarify the evolution of the
users’ information needs related to a user’s interests and actions based on the life events that they experience.
Many researchers have analyzed the changes in users’ interests or actions in life events such as “engagement” [4] or
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work
for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that
copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first
page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions
from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR ’17, August 07-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan
© 2017 ACM. 978-1-4503-5022-8/17/08. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3077136.3080703

1

1009

The market analysts who investigate trends of users’ interests.

Short Research Paper

2.2

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Evolution of Information Needs

DTM is a topic model that extends latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA)[2], which enables us to obtain time-series changes
of topic probability distributions and word probability distributions for a topic. Zhang et al. [6] proposed a diﬀerent type
of DTM for monitoring the temporal evolution of market
competition using tweets and their associated images. Kanhabua et al. [5] proposed a method to detect event-related
queries from Web search logs. These studies clarified that
users’ information needs, which were relevant to “market
of interest” or “natural disasters,” evolved over time. Many
users shared similar information needs simultaneously. In
this paper, we focus on the information needs in life events,
which were shared by users at diﬀerent times.

3

Figure 1: Topic selection with topic probabilities
scoret = m-scoret + v-scoret
|E(xt ) − E(y t )| − µm
m-scoret =
σm
|V (xt ) − V (y t )| − µv
v-scoret =
∑ σv
1
|E(xt ) − E(y t )|
µm =
K

TOPIC TRANSITION EXTRACTION
AND TOPIC SELECTION

First, to extract topic transitions, we use DTM, which enables us to obtain time-series changes of topic probability
distributions and word probability distributions in a topic.
In DTM, time slices (TS) are used to separate the data. We
divided the blogs per month that were posted by users who
experienced a life event and extracted the topic transitions.
In this paper, we set T S = 25 to analyze the 12 months before the life event, 12 months after, and the month in which
the life event occurs.
Next, to select the life event-relevant topics, which evolve
with the life event experience, we select the topics by computing the diﬀerence in topic probabilities before and after
the life event. In our method, we use the diﬀerence between
the means (variances) of topic probabilities before and after
the life event as the clue to find the life event-relevant topics.
With the diﬀerence of the means, we can extract the topics
for which the probabilities increase or decrease drastically
after the life event. With the diﬀerence of variance, we can
extract the topics for which the probabilities stay flat or are
unstable before and after the life event.
In Figure 1, we illustrate the topic selection process with
topic probabilities. The topic transition with a red line in
Figure 1 represents topics for which the probabilities drastically increase. For instance, this line corresponds to the
“working life” topic in the “finding employment” life event
because this topic was newly introduced after the life event
experience. However, the topic transition with a green line
in Figure 1 corresponds to the topics for which the probabilities drop gradually before the life event and remain constant
after the life event. For instance, this line corresponds to the
“job hunting” topic for the “finding employment” life event.
In this transition, the variance of topic probabilities after
the life event decreased compared with that before the life
event.
We defined scoret for topic selection as the sum of the
diﬀerence score of the means of topic probabilities and the
diﬀerence score of the variances of topic probabilities. The
diﬀerence score of the means (m-scoret ) and the diﬀerence
score of the variances (v-scoret ) are normalized as a z score
for each. These scores are defined as follows:

σm =

1
K

√
σv =

k
∑

(2)
(3)
(4)

|V (xt ) − V (y t )|

(5)

(|E(xt ) − E(y t )| − µm )2

(6)

µv =

√

1
K

(1)

k

∑
k

1
K

∑

(|V (xt ) − V (y t )| − µv )2

(7)

k

In these equations, xt is the topic probability distribution
before the life event, y t is the topic probability distribution
after the life event, E(x) is the mean of x, V (x) is the variance of x, K is the number of topics, and µm (µv ) is the mean
of the diﬀerences of the mean (variance) topic probabilities
before and after the life event. σm (σv ) is the standard variation of the diﬀerence of mean (variance) topic probabilities
before and after the life event.

4

EXPERIMENT: TIME EVOLUTION
OF LIFE EVENT TOPICS
4.1 Method
In our experiment, to verify whether the selected topics reflect users’ interests or actions, we checked typical words
and transitions of the selected topics in multiple life events.
We also checked the chronological evolution of words in the
selected topics to verify whether they evolved according to
users’ information needs.
Experimental Data: We collected blogs based on three
life events: “childbirth,” “finding employment,” and “marriage.” We extracted blogs published from January 11, 2008
to March 13, 2011 from blogram.jp2 , which is a popular blog
ranking site in Japan.
(1) Life Event User Selection
We labeled the users who had experienced the life event.
First, we extracted the blog posts with the life event queries
that describe users’ experience. Table 1 shows a list of queries
for each life event. We extracted the users who posted blogs
that contained the queries for each life event (3,357 users
2

1010

http://blogram.jp/

Short Research Paper

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Table 1: Query list for each life event
Life event
Childbirth

Using this equation, we determined the number of topics as follows: K = 100 in “childbirth,” K = 60 in “finding
employment,” and K = 80 in “marriage.” We set the hyperparameter α = 0.01 for each life event and set the TS as
T S = 25, as mentioned previously. We restricted the chosen
words to the grammatical categories noun, verb, and adjective only. We performed a morphological analysis of the data
using MeCab6 , which is an open-source morphological analysis tool for word segmentation in Japanese. We also used
mecab-ipadic-Neologd7 as the morphological dictionary to
expand the informal expressions.
We assume that many users mention the topics which reflect users’ interests and actions. To evaluate the topics that
were posted by a suﬃcient number of users in the time periods (25 months), the topics were restricted as follows:
(1) more than u users posted the topic;
(2) “user who posted topic” was determined by whether
the number of blog posts by the user relevant to the
topic was more than d;
(3) “blog post relevant to the topic” was determined by
whether the topic probability in the blog post as a
percentage was more than r.
In this experiment, we set u = 30, d = 3, and r = 30.

Query
Gave birth to [syussan shimashita]
New profession [shin-syakaijin], Initiation
ceremony3 [nyuusya-shiki]
Getting married [kekkon shimashita], Marriage registered [nyuuseki shimashita]

Finding employment
Marriage

Table 2: Results of labeling for “childbirth”
label
1
1
0

Blog posts
I gave birth to a bouncing baby boy at dawn.
I gave birth to a baby 10 days before my due
date. Although I had a diﬃcult childbirth, we
left the hospital in good health.
My close friend gave birth to a baby boy.

in “childbirth”, 3,719 users in “finding employment”, and
3,619 users in “marriage” life events). To filter out advertisements or posts with other users’ life events, we labeled
the users who experienced their own life event up to 100
users by alphabetical order of blog accounts in each life event
(300 users in total). To extract enough users’ interests and
actions, we restricted the selection to users who posted over
30 blogs. In total, we extracted 34,753 posts for “childbirth,”
40,238 posts for “finding employment,” and 30,605 posts for
“marriage,” which were posted by the users described above.
Table 2 shows examples of blog posts with life event labels
(the original texts were in Japanese). In this Table, label 1
means “experienced their own life event” and label 0 means
“did not experience their own life event.”
(2) Verification of Labeling Reliability
To verify the labeling reliability, we extracted 50 users who
were labeled as “experienced their own life event” and 50
users who were labeled as “did not experience their own
life event” for each life event. We selected 50 blogs that described the life event experience from the 50 labeled users
who experienced their own life event. We also selected 50
blogs that contained the queries in Table 1 from the 50 labeled users who did not experience their own life event. Two
annotators4 labeled 100 blog posts in total. Interannotator
agreement was 1.00 in Cohen’s kappa for each life event.
Accordingly, we concluded that our data were reliable.

4.2

4.3

Users’ Interests and Actions in the Selected Topics:
We checked topic transitions and the words in two selected
topics for each life event to verify that they reflect users’
interests and actions. Tables 3 and 4 show the five words
which appeared many times chronologically for two topics
that were extracted for the life events “childbirth” and “finding employment”8 . The topic name is defined by the author
to refer to the words in the topics. Figures 2 and 3 each
show two topic transitions. In these figures, ±0 indicates the
month when the life event occurred9 .
For this experiment, we selected the topics “status of unborn baby” and “child development” for the “childbirth” life
event. The “status of unborn baby” topic contained words
about the unborn baby’s weight or prenatal care. We also selected the topics “working life” and “job hunting and study”
for the “finding employment” life event. The “working life”
topic contained words about the user’s instruction works or
relationships. The “job hunting and study” topic contained
words about job interviews or visiting a company. The “status of unborn baby” and “job hunting and study” topics were
selected by both scores of the diﬀerence score of the mean
and of the variance. The “child development” topic was selected by the diﬀerence of the variance score. The “working
life” topic was selected by the diﬀerence of the mean score.
Consequently, we have confirmed that our method was
eﬀective for selecting the topics that reflect users’ interests

Experimental Environment

To implement DTM, we used the Python library code Gensim5 . To determine the number of topics, we estimated the
topic independence. Specifically, we computed the dissimilarity of topics using Jensen–Shannon (JS) divergence, which
was applied to all combinations of topics. We determined the
optimal number of topics to maximize the mean of JS divergence by changing the number of topics from 10 to 100 with
step size of 10. The JS divergence between the probability
distributions P and Q is defined as follows, where M is the
mean of P and Q (M (i) = P (i)+Q(i)
).
2
JSD(P ∥ Q) =

∑

1
(
2

P (i) log
i

P (i)
+
M (i)

∑

Q(i) log

Q(i)
)
M (i)

Results

(8)

6

http://taku910.github.io/mecab/
https://github.com/neologd/mecab-ipadic-neologd
In the “marriage” life event, we selected topics such as “wedding
ceremony” or “cooking”; however, for want of space, the results for
“marriage” are omitted.
9
To clarify the probability change, the vertical scales are diﬀerent for
each topic
7

i

8
3

In Japan, initiation ceremonies for all new employees are held
through the recruitment process.
4
The annotators were male college students.
5
https://radimrehurek.com/gensim/

1011

Short Research Paper

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Table 3: Five typical words from the “status of unborn baby” and “child development” topics
“Status of unborn baby”
weight [taijuu]
baby belly [onaka]
prenatal care [kenshin]
week [syuukan]
pregnant [ninshin]

“Child development”
month [kagetsu]
development [seityou]
in recent days [saikin]
fast [hayai]
gain [hue]

Figure 4: Time evolution of word probabilities for
“baby food” [rinyuusyoku] and “child crawling” [haihai]
Table 5: Blog posts about “baby food”
Posting time
5 months after

Figure 2: Topic transitions for “status of unborn
baby” and “child development” topics

5 months after

Table 4: Five typical words from the “working life”
and “job hunting and study” topics
“Working life”
job [shigoto]
oﬃce [kaisya]
induction course [kensyuu]
senior colleague [senpai]
colleagues [douki]

Blog post
I worry about when to start giving baby food.
I heard that oﬀering baby food too early could
lead to allergies for babies.
My baby tried to start eating rice porridge as
baby food.

elapsed months to give baby food” or “what types of foods
should mothers give their babies.”

“Job hunting and study”
job hunting [syuukatsu]
study [benkyou]
interview [mensetsu]
exam [shiken]
company [kigyou]

5

CONCLUSION

In this paper, we have proposed a method to clarify the
evolution of users’ information needs based on when they
experienced life events. In previous research, the analysts
must specify the interests or actions about the life event in
advance. In this paper, we proposed a method for extracting
topics relevant to the life event by computing the diﬀerence
in topic probabilities before and after the life event. Specifically, we used two diﬀerence scores to select the life event
topics: the diﬀerence score of the mean (or variance) of topic
probabilities. We confirmed that the two scores were eﬀective in finding the topics relevant to the life event in multiple
life events. In the “child development” topic, we also found
chronological evolution of words such as “baby food” could
characterize mothers’ information needs.

Figure 3: Topic transitions in “working life” and “job
hunting and study” topics
or actions in multiple life events: Many new mothers become interested in child development after the “childbirth”
life event and senior-year college students become interested
in job hunting before “finding employment.” Next, we clarify their information needs by investigating the evolution of
words in the topics with relevant blog posts.
Evolution of users’ information needs: We selected
the two words of which probabilities changed drastically after “childbirth” (“baby food” [rinyuusyoku] and “child crawling” [haihai]) in the “child development” topic to verify their
evolution. Figure 4 shows the time evolution of word probabilities for the words “baby food” [rinyuusyoku] and “child
crawling” [haihai]. In Figure 4, “baby food” increased and
first appeared as top 20 words in the “child development”
topic two months after “childbirth.” “Child crawling” increased and first appeared as top 20 words in the topic
eight months after “childbirth.” Table 5 shows blog posts
relevant to the “child development” topic that contained
the word “baby food” [rinyuusyoku] (the original texts were
in Japanese). In Table 5, we identify mothers’ information
needs such as “the relationship between an allergy and the

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partially supported by a JSPS Grant-in-Aid
for Scientific Research (B) (#16H02913) and ACM SIGIR
Student Travel Grant.

REFERENCES
[1] David M. Blei and John D. Laﬀerty. 2006. Dynamic Topic
Models. In Proc. of the 23rd Int’l Conf. on Machine Learning
(ICML 2006). Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 113–120.
[2] David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. Jordan. 2003. Latent Dirichlet Allocation. Journal of Machine Learning Research 3 (2003), 993–1022.
[3] Moira Burke and Robert Kraut. 2013. Using Facebook after Losing a Job: Diﬀerential Benefits of Strong and Weak Ties. In Proc.
of the 2013 Conf. on Computer Supported Cooperative Work
(CSCW 2013). San Antonio, TX, USA, 1419–1430.
[4] Munmun De Choudhury and Micheal Massimi. 2015. “She said
yes!” Liminality and Engagement Announcements on Twitter. In
Proc. of iConference 2015. Newport Beach, CA, USA, 1–13.
[5] Nattiya Kanhabua, Tu Ngoc Nguyen, and Wolfgang Nejdl. 2015.
Learning to Detect Event-Related Queries for Web Search. In
Proc. of the 24th Int’l Conf. on World Wide Web (WWW
2015). Florence, Italy, 1339–1344.
[6] Hao Zhang, Gunhee Kim, and Eric P. Xing. 2015. Dynamic Topic
Modeling for Monitoring Market Competition from Online Text
and Image Data. In Proc. of the 21th ACM SIGKDD Int’l Conf.
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD 2015). Sydney, Australia, 1425–1434.

1012

