Demonstration Paper

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

BioNex: A System For Biomedical News Event Exploration
Patrick Ernst

Arunav Mishra

Max Planck Institut für Informatik
Germany
pernst@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Max Planck Institut für Informatik
Germany
amishra@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Avishek Anand

Vinay Setty

L3S Research Center
Germany
anand@L3S.de

Aalborg University
Denmark
vinay@cs.aau.dk
During epidemic outbreaks, online news media plays an import
role in providing regular warnings and timely updates. For example,
the first news article mentioning Ebola from the affected countries
was published on March 20th, 2014 (two days prior to the official
announcement of the outbreak) [14]. Online news media has also
been growing rapidly with various media outlets and independent
providers producing massive amounts of news articles. This on
the one hand made various analytics tasks possible, on the other
hand, has made it difficult to retrospect on past epidemic outbreaks.
For example, the Gdelt project3 collects and analyzes hundreds of
thousands of news articles each day by crawling more than 6000
online news sources from over 127 countries worldwide.
These news collections are rich sources of information about
past disease outbreaks, and other co-occurring news events. For
understanding the context which contributed to the epidemics,
analyzing these news collections becomes essential. Since these
collections extensively cover daily news events, the news events
about the epidemics can be studied in the context of other news
events that were also popular at the same time.
For exploratory analysis of biomedical news events, searching
on individual news articles is not sufficient. Instead we need clusters of news articles discussing the same event, which can be used
to derive popularity features, historical importance and linking
them to similar events in the past. It is thus required to design
an efficient and scalable system that facilitates exploratory search
over automatically mined biomedical news events represented as
precomputed clusters of multiple news articles from a stream of
daily news articles from numerous media outlets. To aid exploration
over large and complex news article clusters, the system should
exhibit a query interface that accepts and suggest tentative queries
as starting points. In addition, effective cluster visualization and
browsing tools are essential to facilitate to perform deeper analytics on the news article clusters describing an event. Appropriate
temporal visualization tools can aid effective and efficient analytics.
While exploring the biomedical news events considering the
biomedical entities is essential. However, since we are dealing with
news articles from diverse geographical regions, the biomedical entities may be expressed in different surface forms. For example, Swine
flu is also reported as swine influenza, H1N1 virus pandemic, pig
influenza, hog flu, and pig flu. It thus is crucial to disambiguate the
biomedical entities in the text to identify news articles reporting a
disease in different surface forms. Even though existing techniques

ABSTRACT
We demonstrate BioNex, a system to mine, rank and visualize
biomedical news events. BioNex takes biomedical queries such
as “Ebola virus disease” and retrieves the k most relevant news
events for them. To achieve this we first mine the generic news
events by clustering them on a daily basis using general named
entities and textual features. These clusters are also tagged with
disambiguated biomedical entities which aid in biomedical news
event exploration. These clusters are then used to compute the
importance scores for the event clusters based on a combination
of textual, semantic, popularity and historical importance features.
BioNex also visualizes the retrieved event clusters to highlight
the top news events and corresponding news articles for the given
query. The visualization also provides the context for news events
using (1) a chain of historically relevant news event clusters, and
(2) other non-biomedical events from the same day.

KEYWORDS
Biological Event Exploration; Event Clustering; Biomedical Entities

1

INTRODUCTION

Infectious diseases and medical epidemics are still major causes of
death and health concerns in underdeveloped countries. Due to
increased movements of people in a connected and interdependent
world there is an increased risk of spreading epidemic diseases such
as Ebola virus disease, Zika fever and Influenzas (like swine flu,
bird flu, etc.) at a global scale. This was evident from the recent
Ebola outbreaks in West Africa which was eventually spread to
Spain1 and United States2 via health workers who traveled to West
Africa. Health organizations such as the WHO and the CDC spend
tremendous resources to investigate the reasons and context of
such epidemics to be prepared for future disease outbreaks.
1 http://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-29514920
2 https://goo.gl/wsa4wE

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR '17, August 07-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan
© 2017 ACM. 978-1-4503-5022-8/17/08. . . $15.00
DOI: 10.1145/3077136.3084150

3 http://gdeltproject.org

1277

Demonstration Paper

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

[13] rely on recognition and disambiguation of generic named entities such as TagMe [7], they are rendered ineffective for biomedical
entities [6]. For example, consider the following use-cases:
• Paul Sterling, an epidemiologist at the Centers of Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC), wants to analyze the spreading of Ebola
virus to other continents. Using an exploratory search system,
he learns that the spread was due to health care workers getting
infected, and plans sufficient airport checks for global epidemics.
• Lisa Lane, a health care worker in Brazil wants to understand
how did Zika virus reach her country. With an exploratory
search system, she tries to analyze other co-occurring events
during the outbreak. Her analysis leads to the hypothesis that
the virus entered Brazil during the 2014 FIFA World Cup4 .
In the above use-cases, users perform complex analytics tasks. Using an effective search and exploration system, they can start with
as simple query as “ebola” and “zika”. Following the automatic
query suggestions, they dig into the complex news event clusters
retrieved by the system describing the Ebola outbreak using a hierarchical cluster browser. Deeper analytics is made possible by
visualizing the biomedical events in context of other events.
Motivated from the above use-cases, we propose a system coined
BioNex with following functionalities: 1) mines news events with
special emphasis to biomedical news events by leveraging the disambiguated biomedical entities using a state-of-the-art biomedical
entity disambiguation system [6]; 2) ranks biomedical news events
based on their current day popularity and historical significance as
defined in [13]; 3) for exploratory search, implements a biomedical
entity based automatic query suggestion; 4) effective hierarchical
circle-packing based visualization of event clusters in context of
other co-occurring events; 5) timeline tool to analyze temporal
evolution of the biomedical events.
State-of-the-art. Commercial engines like Google Flu and Dengue
Trends 5 leverage large amounts of search query logs for surveillance of epidemics like Flu and Dengue outbreaks in 25 countries. Among academic efforts, information extraction systems
like Proteus-BIO [9] focus on generating a database of outbreaks
by mining web documents. Multilingual systems like the DAnIEL
[1] leverage online news articles published in different languages
to detect epidemics. Other methods leverage social media for analyzing specific disease outbreaks like Ebola [12], Cholera [4], E.
coli [4], and Zika [10]. We refer to [3] for a systematic review of
such infectious disease surveillance systems. These systems usually
focus on real-time reporting of disease outbreaks, contrary to our
work focusing on the exploration and retrospect dissemination of
important biomedical news events.
Furthermore, our system functions as a generic event miner
while tailoring the exploration to biomedical news events. This
enables BioNex to aid analytical tasks of understanding causality
and ramifications of different diseases while keeping other nonbiomedical news events in view. For example, a typhoon in Trust
Territories in 1971 disrupted catchment water sources that forced
people to use contaminated groundwater resulting in an outbreak
of Balantidiasis. Similarly, a cyclone and flooding in Mauritius in
1980 led to an outbreak of typhoid.

Preprocessing Module

Online
feed

Event Mining

Data Input

Event Chaining

User Interface

Ranked Retrieval of Biomedical News
Events

Visualization
Module
Client

Biomedical
Entity
Dictionary

Biomedical Entity Disambiguation

Daily News
Stream

RESTful
API

Historically Important and General
event Retrieval
Event Ranker

Event-Cluster
Index
JAVA
Method
Calls

Elasticsearch

Figure 1: System architecture of BioNex.
Contributions. 1) We present BioNex as a novel exploratory
search system that tailors our generic method [13] to efficiently
mine, chain, and rank events from a stream of daily news articles towards biomedical news events. 2) To identify central news articles
on biomedical news events, BioNex leverages biomedical entity
disambiguation presented by us in a prior work [6]. 3) BioNex provides powerful auto-completion suggestions based on entity-centric
queries over a large biomedical knowledge base, and exhibits effective visualization tools such as hierarchical cluster browser of
biomedical news events embedded in temporal contexts.

2

SYSTEM OVERVIEW

BioNex consists of five main modules as illustrated in Figure 1.
1) The Data input module provides batches of news articles for
each day. 2) The Preprocessing module then mines news events and
computes event chains and their importance scores on a daily basis.
3) Elasticsearch is used to index the biomedical entities and the
event clusters to provide fast query suggestions to the user and
efficiently search the news events clusters. 4) An Event ranker is
responsible for retrieving biomedical news events from the eventcluster index in Elasticsearch. It is also responsible for retrieving
historically important news events as well as other top news events
from a given day. 5) Finally, the user interface to formulate queries
and visualize the relevant news events is implemented using a
web-interface in the Client module.

2.1

Preprocessing module

The preprocessing module consists of three stages to automatically
mine, rank and chain events from the input news collection.
Biomedical Entity Disambiguation. To design a biological exploration system leveraging news articles it becomes integral to
design methods that are aware of the biomedical entities mentioned
thus treating them as strong indicators. For this as the first module, we define the following problem: Given a set of news articles
D, automatically recognize and disambiguate biomedical entities by
linking them to a domain-specific knowledge base thus generating
and entity set Ebio (d) for each news article d. .
To address this problem, this module implements a two-step
process to annotate an input set of news articles with mentioned
biomedical entities [6]. In the entity recognition step, we employ
the Stanford CoreNLP software [11] to tokenize, split into sentences, tag parts-of-speech, lemmatize, and parse text in the input
stream of news articles into syntactic dependency graphs. Using
CoreNLP NER and SUTime modules we extend the resulting entity
set by organizations, locations and time expressions which could

4 https://goo.gl/Kc9eYB

5 https://www.google.org/flutrends/about/

1278

Demonstration Paper

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

not be linked to any open-domain knowledge base (like YAGO),
thus treating them as candidates. Using the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) as a dictionary covering 3,221,702 biomedical
entities with 12,842,558 entity names, we use locality sensitive hashing (LSH) with min-wise independent permutations (MinHash) [8]
based methods to quickly find matching candidates. A successful match provides us also with the entity’s semantic type. In the
disambiguation step, the entity type information is used to disambiguate between multiple entity candidates by matching to the
same noun chunk in the input text. For disambiguation, a ranked
list of entities is retrieved from UMLS for the remaining candidates
and considering the top ranked entity for each candidate.
Event Mining. With the input set of news articles annotated with
biomedical entities, we next detect news events that are represented
as a cluster describing a specific news topic, like “Ebola Outbreak
2014”. Here, we define the following problem: Given a set D of news
stories d for a single day t, automatically group them into clusters
c ∈ C each describing an event.
To address the problem, in our method [13], we first represent
each d with the following features: 1) a set of entities Eдen (d)
representing person, organization, and location; and 2) a set of
shingles S(d) that containing a unique n-gram shingles using wshingling [2]. We then combine the entity and shingles sets into
a set as, F (d) = Eдen (d) ∪ Ebio (d) ∪ S(d) to estimate similarity
between two stories, d and d 0 , based on their Jaccard distance as,
δ (d, d 0 ) = 1 −

|F (d) ∩ F (d 0 )|
.
|F (d) ∪ F (d 0 )|

of a biomedical entity selected through auto-complete suggestions,
and a standard keyword-based query. For example, “Ebola virus disease”. The biomedical events are retrieved by comparing the textual
content of the news articles in corresponding clusters, biomedical
entity mentions, and the cluster size, against the query. Formally,
´
¯ b
X
score(c, q) = tf-idf(c, eq )+
tf-idf(c, w) ∗ (S e f f (c) + 1) , (3)
w ∈sq

where eq is the disambiguated biomedical entity, sq the textual keyword representation of the given query q, tf-idf the standard term
and document frequency scoring function, and S e f f the effective
cluster size after removing the outliers as described in [13].
To facilitate the event retrieval and ranking using Elasticsearch
we override its default scoring and implement our scoring function
defined in Equation 3. Further, the event ranker is also responsible
for retrieving the precomputed important general (non-biomedical)
events for the days of the retrieved biological events from the index.
Finally, the historically important event clusters from the previous
day are also retrieved based on the historical importance H score
using Equation 2. This is done simply with a second round of
retrieval with the dates as a boolean query.

3

(1)

To obtain the final clustering, we leverage LSH with MinHash
which is known to efficiently handle high dimensions and provide
provably scalable approximation of the Jaccard distance δ (d, d 0 ).
This enables efficiently finding similar news stories to any given
news article by simply considering its nearest neighbors that are
hashed into a single bucket. Using this we initialize the clusters
with news stories which are within the ϵ distance from each other.
Then the news stories are reassigned and clusters are merged so as
to maximize the cluster cohesiveness that is defined as the average
pair-wise distance between each news article d in a cluster c.
Event Chaining. For computing the event chain for an event
cluster c t on a given day t, we iteratively connect c t with a previous
day news event c t −1 which minimizes the distance value defined in
Equation 1 i.e. c t −1 = argminCt −1 {δ (c t , c t −1 )}. We follow the chain
until the distance pmin(c t , c t −1 ) = min δ (c t , c t −1 ) is above a certain
acceptable threshold θ (set as 0.5 for this demo after extensive
evaluations from [13]). Once we have a cluster chain we compute
the historical importance H for a news event c t as,
X
H (c t ) =
(β .S e f f (c i ) + (1 − β).e α .(i−t )psim(c i , c i−1 )) ,
(2)
i ≤t

where the parameter α is the weight for the decay function and β
is a tuning parameter to control the importance of cluster chain
strength to the matching previous day cluster size.

2.2

DEMONSTRATION

Implementation: BioNex exhibits a responsive web interface that
is implemented using the d3js6 toolkit and Play Framework7 . For
entity disambiguation we use TagMe [7] and KnowLife [6].
Data. For implementing the prototype, we rely on the English
subset of Gdelt amounting to around 8 million news articles ranging
from September 2013 to August 2014 (365 days), with a mean daily
batch of 22K stories. The number of news sources covered are over
6000 from a total of 167 different countries.
Exploratory Search Interface. The BioNex user interface are
illustrated in Figure 2. The query input panel implements an entityaware auto-complete method displayed as user-friendly responsive
drop-down menu. Our system retrieves a list of entity and category
candidates ranked based on a popularity measure (presented in our
prior work [5]), where any token of their name (synonyms) matches
the prefix. For example, typing “ebola” retrieves “Hemorrhagic Fever,
Ebola” entity as top suggestion.
The visualization of the news events uses a circle-packing layout, as illustrated in Figure 2. The retrieved event clusters are first
displayed as one large circle at Level-1. This further packs independent ranked labeled clusters as the Level-2 (smaller) circles that
summarize events for a single day. For a user-friendly visualization,
radius of the Level-2 event circles are proportional to their relevance
scores to the query. Meta-data like search title, relevance score, and
density along with the full text of the centroid article of an event
cluster at Level-2 can be obtained by simply double clicking. From
here on, Level-3 clusters can be viewed zooming into the Level-2
clusters. Since our goal is to visualize the relevant event clusters
in context of general events to aid deeper analytics, we leverage a
color scheme to identify the different events. The relevant clusters
are highlighted with a dark blue color while general events are in
cyan. Moreover, historically significant events in the previous days

Event Ranker

The task of the event ranker module is to retrieve a ranked list
of top-k relevant clusters from Elasticsearch. This module takes a
biomedical query as input, which can be expressed as a combination

6 https://d3js.org/

7 https://www.playframework.com/

1279

Demonstration Paper

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Query Box

Level 2
Historically
Relevant
Previous Event

Suggestion

Relevant
Event

Relevance
Rank of
Cluster

Co-occurring
Events On
Same Day

Temporal
Clusters

Level 4
Temporal Visualization
No. of Events

News
Article
Text

Months

Geographic
Locations

Level 1

Figure 2: High-level overview of BioNex exploratory search interface.
are displayed with a gradient of red. At Level-4 that is reached by
zooming into Level-3, full text of the individual news articles can
be accessed by clicking the smallest circles. To perform temporal
analytics, the temporal visualization tool displays distribution of
the events at Level-1 over a timeline at the day granularity. To generate the distribution, the publication dates of the centroid news
articles of the event clusters are considered. The individual events
can viewed directly at Level-2 and Level-3 from the timeline by
selecting a specific day, thus additionally functioning as a filter.

4

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This research was partially funded by the Danish Council for Independent Research under grant agreement DFF-4093-00301.

REFERENCES
[1] Romain Brixtel, Gaël Lejeune, Antoine Doucet, and Nadine Lucas. Any language
early detection of epidemic diseases from web news streams. In ICHI, 2013.
[2] Andrei Z Broder, Steven C Glassman, Mark S Manasse, and Geoffrey Zweig.
Syntactic clustering of the web. Computer Networks and ISDN Systems, 29(8):1157–
1166, 1997.
[3] Jihye Choi, Youngtae Cho, Eunyoung Shim, and Hyekyung Woo. Web-based infectious disease surveillance systems and public health perspectives: a systematic
review. BMC Public Health, 16(1):1238, 2016.
[4] Ernesto Diaz-Aviles and Avaré Stewart. Tracking twitter for epidemic intelligence: case study: Ehec/hus outbreak in germany, 2011. In WebSci, 2012.
[5] Patrick Ernst, Amy Siu, Dragan Milchevski, Johannes Hoffart, and Gerhard
Weikum. Deeplife: An entity-aware search, analytics and exploration platform
for health and life sciences. In ACL, 2016.
[6] Patrick Ernst, Amy Siu, and Gerhard Weikum. Knowlife: a versatile approach
for constructing a large knowledge graph for biomedical sciences. BMC bioinformatics, 16(1):157, 2015.
[7] Paolo Ferragina and Ugo Scaiella. Tagme: on-the-fly annotation of short text
fragments (by wikipedia entities). In CIKM, 2010.
[8] Aristides Gionis, Piotr Indyk, Rajeev Motwani, et al. Similarity search in high
dimensions via hashing. In VLDB, 1999.
[9] Ralph Grishman, Silja Huttunen, and Roman Yangarber. Information extraction
for enhanced access to disease outbreak reports. Journal of Biomedical Informatics,
35(4):236–246, 2002.
[10] Aparup Khatua and Apalak Khatua. Immediate and long-term effects of 2016
zika outbreak: A twitter-based study. In Healthcom, 2016.
[11] Christopher D Manning, Mihai Surdeanu, John Bauer, Jenny Rose Finkel, Steven
Bethard, and David McClosky. The stanford corenlp natural language processing
toolkit. In ACL (System Demonstrations), 2014.
[12] Michelle Odlum and Sunmoo Yoon. What can we learn about the ebola outbreak
from tweets? American Journal of Infection Control, 43(6):563–571, 2015.
[13] Vinay Setty, Abhijit Anand, Arunav Mishra, and Avishek Anand. Modeling event
importance for ranking daily news events. In WSDM, pages 231–240, 2017.
[14] Elad Yom-Tov. Ebola data from the internet: An opportunity for syndromic
surveillance or a news event? In DH, 2015.

Demonstration Scenario. Consider the first use-case in Section
1 and the illustration in Figure 2. To explore the outbreak of Ebola,
Paul Sterling starts by typing “ebola” into the query box. The system retrieves entities, where any token of their name or synonyms
matches the prefix. These candidates are then ranked by corpus
statistics. Following the suggestion, he selects “Hemorrhagic Fever,
Ebola” as the query and the system ranks relevant events to the
input query at Level-1. He chooses to dig into the rank 2 cluster
by quickly identifying the second largest cluster at Level-2 representing events on December 25, 2014. Besides the event retrieved
by the query, the system also presents the user a temporal context,
i.e. other co-occurring seminal events that happened along with
relevant event indicated as a dark blue circle and historic significant events of previous days (event chains) indicated with the red
color. He then chooses to dig deeper in to the cluster labeled “CDC
Mishandles Samples of Ebola Possibly Exposing Lab Employee to
Virus”. Finally, after reading the clustered news articles that represent the event, in the article with headline “Possible Ebola virus
exposure reported at CDC laboratory” he discovers that there was
a risk of exposure due to transportation issues of a small amount
of material from an Ebola virus experiment.

1280

