SIRIP 1: Start-Ups and Beyond

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Search Without a Query - Powering Job Recommendations via
Search Index at LinkedIn
Dhruv Arya

Ganesh Venkataraman

LinkedIn Corporation
darya@linkedin.com

LinkedIn Corporation
ghvenkat@linkedin.com

ABSTRACT
The mission of LinkedIn is to connect the world’s professionals
to make them more productive and successful. LinkedIn operates
the world’s largest professional network on the Internet with more
than 500 Million members in over 200 countries. Core to realizing
the mission is to help people find jobs. In this paper, we describe
how the jobs recommendations is powered by a search index and
some practical challenges involved in scaling such a system.

1

INTRODUCTION

With a rich corpus of professional profiles, network connections
and member actions, LinkedIn is in a unique position to anticipate
the best job matches for a given member profile. Our jobs index is
extremely dynamic with new jobs listed and older ones closed frequently. The dynamism within the jobs index necessitates the need
to power recommendations via a real time system (like an inverted
index) as opposed to an offline system. Typical scoring function of
a recommender system involves finding a suitable match between
member profile with a job description. The real time requirements
makes it impossible to score all our job listings for a given member.
This implies that we need to construct a query based on member
profile, preferences and context which retrieves a much smaller
subset of documents to rank. Such query construction presents
interesting engineering trade offs. A broad query would imply too
many documents to rank thereby breaking our latency constraints
while a narrow query would imply loss of recall. For maintaining
high quality match within our tight latency constraints, several
different aspects of our system needs to come together.

2

Figure 1: Jobs recommendations in jobs homepage
features. Such a formulation helped reduce the p99 latency (worst
1% of queries) by 56%.

4

5

LEARNING TO RANK

The ranking function for job recommendations is deeply personalized using generalized linear models [2]. The regression model
uses global coefficients as well as ID-level coefficients - in our case
coefficients per member and job.

INDEXING

Our indexing system is based off custom backend - Galene [1]. Each
job listing goes through a standardization pipeline which extracts
structured and semi structured information and stores it in our
index. The posting list is ordered in a document dependent static
order. This static rank is heavily used in query construction and
plays a big role in reducing latency.

3

OFFLINE TRAINING FRAMEWORK

We implemented an offline replay mechanism which does a true
evaluation of the underlying ranking metric while evaluating gain
in latency. It also increases the experimentation velocity by near
accurate reproduction of production behavior and reduces number
of A/B tests needed with live traffic. The framework is generic across
search and recommendations so long as the underlying retrieval is
based on an inverted index.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Information Retrieval → Recommender Systems;

KEYWORDS
Information Retrieval, Personalized Search, Recommender Systems

DECISION TREE BASED QUERY
CONSTRUCTION

REFERENCES
[1] S. Sankar. Did you mean "galene",https://engineering.linkedin.com/search/didyou-mean-galene. 2014.
[2] X. Zhang, Y. Zhou, Y. Ma, B.-C. Chen, L. Zhang, and D. Agarwal. Glmix: Generalized linear mixed models for large-scale response prediction. In Proceedings of
the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining, pages 363–372. ACM, 2016.

We convert the query construction problem into a decision tree
problem with branches in the tree corresponding to query clauses
and show that such a formulation scales for very large number of
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’17, August 07–11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan
© 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). 978-1-4503-5022-8/17/08.
DOI: 10.1145/3077136.3096470

1347

