SIRIP 2: Start-Up Research and Academic Collaboration

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Traditional IR Meets Ontology Engineering in Search for Data
Anton Firsov

Knoema
Perm, Russia
afirsov@knoema.com
structure. For every series we indexed all metadata connected to it.
The results were lacking for some types of queries such as ’GDP’
or ’China vs United States GDP’.
To solve this problems in our search engine we looked for relevant dimension members first instead of whole series. After that we
analyzed found dimension members and relations between them
and generated results on the fly. In case with two dimension members from the same dimension we combined 2 relevant series together. For queries like ’GDP’ we grouped together all series with
difference in only one dimension. Our solution also allowed us to
process such queries as ’top 5 countries by gdp’ with use of template
matching.
Another way for user to get the needed data is FactFinder. It
is a tool that given a text document allows to find relevant to the
document data from our repository. It could be useful to users who
want to check facts mentioned in some article, get additional data
about it or find data to illustrate an article they are writing.
The first approach we tried was to treat the text document as a
search query. However precision of such solution was very poor.
After analysis of the results we concluded that the problem was in
different terminology used to describe same concepts in article and
in series metadata. In the absence of big user action log necessary for
machine learning, we decided to use ontology engineering approach
which allowed us to significantly improve precision.
Digital Research Assistant is a bot (conversational agent) capable of communicating with people through various channels
like messengers (Skype, Slack, FB Messenger, Telegram), e-mail
etc. People can ask bot various data related questions like "How
big is oil production in Nigeria?" or "What data do you have on
Mexico?". Bot translates natural language queries into structured
intents (high-level data requests) using ontology to resolve ambiguities, finds relevant data using our search engine and converts
received data into a response in natural language.
The bot should keep the user engaged into conversation. One of
the ways to do it is to suggest him or her data on topics which could
be interesting to the user based on earlier questions. And again, we
use ontology and data structure to suggest concepts related to the
one we already know the user is interested in.

ABSTRACT
The amount of available data grows every day. The data can help to
make better decisions. However, with growing volume and variety
it becomes increasingly more difficult to find the necessary data.
Traditional search engines such as ElasticSearch or Apache Solr
are primarily designed to search for text documents. Whereas a
search for data has its own specifics: there is less text and more
structure. Knoema’s search engine is designed specifically to search
for data by leveraging data’s structure in order to get better results
compared to document-oriented search engines.

KEYWORDS
IR; structured data search; conversational search interaction; intelligent personal assistants

1

DATA STRUCTURE

The basic unit of data in Knoema is dataset. Each dataset contains
structured information on specific topic and has name, description,
source and publication date. Users can upload their own datasets.
Each dataset consists of series. Series is a sequence of observations or records which hold numerical values (data) and descriptive
information (metadata) about these values.
Each dataset in Knoema has a number of associated dimensions
used to categorize data in the dataset. Each dimension is an ordered
hierarchical list of values or dimension members. Dataset’s dimension can be used as filters while accessing data. For example, in
a dataset having Country and Indicator dimensions user can select
population data for United States by setting filter to Country = United
States and Indicator = Population. Different datasets have different
sets of dimensions with different dimension members.
Currently our repository contains more than 2.2 billion data
series organized into approximately 30 thousand datasets from
more than a thousand sources such as IMF, OECD, World Bank, etc.
and covers topics like economy, demographics, energy and so on.

2

INFORMATION RETRIEVAL

We provide several ways by which users can get the data they need.
The first way is a classic search query.
We experimented with application of traditional search engine
(ElasticSearch) to the data in our repository with described above

3

CONCLUSIONS

Our evaluation shows that when searching in data the use of its
structure allows to increase relevance of the results, broaden types
of queries which can be processed and enhance user engagement.
Another way to increase relevance in situation when machine
learning is unavailable due to the absence of big user action logs
is the use of ontology-based approach. Ontology allows to make
search adaptive and extensible and bootstrap a process of acquiring
user action log for later use in machine learning approach.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’17, August 07-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan
© 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5022-8/17/08. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3077136.3096473

1355

