SIRIP 2: Start-Up Research and Academic Collaboration

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Twicalli: An Earthquake Detection System Based on Citizen
Sensors Used for Emergency Response in Chile∗
Barbara Poblete

Department of Computer Science, University of Chile
Beauchef 851
Santiago, Chile
bpoblete@dcc.uchile.cl
of all magnitudes in the areas where they are located. However,
this infrastructure does not have the same coverage in all areas
world-wide as it is expensive to deploy and maintain. In addition,
a great amount of the activity detected by seismographs is not
actually perceived by the population, depending on the depth of
the earthquake and local terrain conditions. This requires the use
of complementary means (such as other instruments or human
assessment) to determine if an earthquake was effectively “felt” on
the earth’s surface and its intensity.
On the other hand, social media provides low-cost real-time access to so-called “citizen sensors” of various real-world phenomena,
including earthquakes. Experts have been using this information
for some years to complement seismograph data. The seminal work
of Sakaki et al. at WWW2010 showed that user activity on Twitter
can allow quickly identify earthquake epicenters and the intensity.
Following these findings, several other promising approaches have
emerged to address this task for specific geographical areas (e.g.
EARS by Avvenuti et al. 2014, Earle et al. 2012, CSIRO Australia
2012 and ESA by Robinson et al. 2013).
Nevertheless, despite the usefulness of social media for earthquake detection, existing solutions still allow important room for
improvement. The main issues that remain are that existing approaches have a very high tradeoff between precision and recall, and
in most cases, depend on supervised techniques that are extremely
difficult to scale for world-wide coverage. As a consequence, there
are no publicly available tools with global geographical coverage
that provide good precision and recall.
To address this problem, we created Twicalli1 . a system that
is noise tolerant, unsupervised, easy to parametrize, and robust
in terms of providing good precision and recall for high and lowmagnitude earthquakes. This approach has very low space-time
complexity, requiring little computational resources (it can be run
on a personal computer) allowing us to perform multilingual detections. In addition, being unsupervised allows our system to
self-adapt to changes in the input stream, reducing significantly
maintenance efforts. Our methodology is based on tracking signals
created from aggregated messages related to earthquakes, including
arrival rates of location mentions. The proposed approach solves
some of the main issues that limited the possibility of using Twitter
for world-wide earthquake detection and description.

ABSTRACT
In this talk I will describe “Twicalli”, a real-time earthquake detection system based on citizen sensors. This system is publicly
available for over a year, at http://twicalli.cl, and is currently in use
as a decision support tool by the National Seismology Office and
by the Hydrographic and the Oceanographic Service in Chile.
The novelty of our system relies on the fact that it has a very
good precision and recall tradeoff for earthquakes of all magnitude
ranges that were reported on Twitter. Our earthquake detection
methodology is simple, efficient, unsupervised, and it can detect
earthquakes reported globally in any language and any region. This
complements existing approaches that are either: i) supervised
and customized to a particular geographical region, which makes
them very expensive to scale geographically and keep up-to-date,
or ii) unsupervised with low earthquake recall. The evaluation
of our system, performed during a 9-month period, shows that
our solution is competitive to the best state-of-the-art methods,
providing very good precision and recall performance for a wide
range of earthquake magnitudes.

CCS CONCEPTS
•Human-centered computing →Geographic visualization; Information visualization; •Computing methodologies →Machine
learning approaches; •Applied computing →Sociology;

KEYWORDS
emergency management; event detection; social media; social sensing; data visualization; decision support; Twitter

TALK DESCRIPTION
In highly seismic countries, the study and characterization of earthquakes is critical. Countries such as Japan, China, the U.S. and
Chile, just to name a few, devote significant resources to fast earthquake detection and research. Seismographs are highly-sensitive
physical instruments that measure seismic waves. Dense seismograph networks allow to accurately detect and describe earthquakes
∗ This is joint work with Jazmine Maldonado jamaldon@dcc.uchile.cl and Jheser Juzman

jguzman@dcc.uchile.cl

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’17, August 7–11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan.
© 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). 978-1-4503-5022-8/17/08.
DOI: 10.1145/3077136.3096474

1 Twicalli

is a term coined by Markus Strohmaier in 2010.https://mstrohm.wordpress.
com/2010/01/15/measuring-earthquakes-on-twitter-the-twicalli-scale/

1359

