SIRIP 1: Start-Ups and Beyond

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Structuring the Unstructured: From Startup to Making Sense of
eBay’s Huge eCommerce Inventory
Ido Guy and Kira Radinsky

eBay Research
Netanya, Israel
idoguy@acm.org,kradinsky@ebay.com
SIGIR 2016 study of voice search received the best paper honorable
mention award [1].
Kira Radinsky is the chief scientist and director of data science
of eBay, where she is building the next generation predictive data
mining, deep learning, and natural language processing solutions
for eCommerce. Dr. Radinsky co-founded SalesPredict, acquired by
eBay in 2016. She gained international recognition for her work
at Microsoft Research, where she developed predictive algorithms
that recognized the early warning signs of global events, including
political riots and disease epidemics. In 2013, she was named to the
MIT Technology Review 35 young innovators under 35, and in 2015
as Forbes 30 under 30 rising stars in enterprise technology. She is a
frequent presenter at global tech events, including TEDx and the
Harvard Business Review. Radinsky also serves as a visiting professor at the Technion, Israel’s Institute of Technology, where she
focuses on the application of predictive data mining in medicine.

ABSTRACT
Electronic commerce continues to gain popularity in recent years.
On eBay, one of the largest on-line marketplaces in the world,
millions of new listings (items) are submitted by a variety of sellers
every day. This renders a rich diverse inventory characterized by a
particularly long tail [7]. In addition, many items in the inventory
lack basic structured information, such as product identifiers, brand,
category, and other properties, due to sellers’ tendency to input
unstructured information only, namely title and description [6].
Such inventory therefore requires a handful of large-scale solutions
to assist in organizing the data and gaining business insights.
In 2016, eBay acquired SalesPredict to help structure its unstructured data. In this proposed presentation, we will share the story
of a research startup from its inception until its acquisition and
integration as eBay’s data science team. We will review the numerous challenges from research and engineering perspectives of
a startup and the principal challenges the eBay data science organization deals with today. These include the identification of
duplicate, similar, and related products; the extraction of namevalue attributes from item titles and descriptions; the matching of
items entered by sellers to catalog products; the ranking of item
titles based on their likelihood to serve as “good” product titles;
and the creation of “browse node” pages to address complex search
queries from potential buyers. We will describe how the eBay data
science team approaches these challenges and some of the solutions
already launched to production. These solutions involve the use
of large-scale machine learning, information retrieval, and natural
language processing techniques, and should therefore be of interest
to the SIGIR audience at large.

1

2

ABOUT THE COMPANY

SalesPredict was founded in 2012 as a pioneer in the field of predictive marketing. It created a technology that harvests the unstructured Web and gathers information about interactions between
companies and individuals. Combining it with internal sales data
of its customers, SalesPredict created one of the largest economic
graphs providing predictive analysis of future business interactions.
On average, conversion rates of its customers went up by 300%. In
2016, it was acquired by eBay.
eBay is one of the world’s largest on-line marketplaces, allowing
hundreds of millions of sellers and buyers to exchange goods of
virtually any kind. Data science on top of eBay’s inventory aims
to arrange, enrich, and gain insights from the large data in order
to enhance the shopping experience and support services such as
faceted navigation, search, and recommendation.

ABOUT THE PRESENTERS

Ido Guy is the head of EMEA research at eBay, leading teams in
Israel and Germany whose expertise lie in text analysis. Prior to
joining eBay, Ido spent three years at Yahoo Research as a Principal
Research Engineer and before that he managed the Social Technologies group at IBM Research. In all of these roles, the focus of his
work was building state-of-the-art systems that deliver innovation
into products. Ido has published over 50 papers in leading conferences and journals, spanning human-computer interaction [4],
recommender systems [3], and information retrieval [2, 5]. His

REFERENCES
[1] Ido Guy. 2016. Searching by Talking: Analysis of Voice Queries on Mobile Web
Search. In Proc. SIGIR. 35–44.
[2] Ido Guy, Avihai Mejer, Alexander Nus, and Fiana Raiber. 2017. Extracting and
Ranking Travel Tips from User-Generated Reviews. In Proc. WWW. 987–996.
[3] Ido Guy, Inbal Ronen, Elad Kravi, and Maya Barnea. 2016. Increasing Activity in
Enterprise Online Communities Using Content Recommendation. ACM Trans.
Comput.-Hum. Interact. 23, 4, Article 22 (2016), 22:1–22:28 pages.
[4] Ido Guy, Inbal Ronen, Naama Zwerdling, Irena Zuyev-Grabovitch, and Michal
Jacovi. 2016. What is Your Organization ‘Like’?: A Study of Liking Activity in
the Enterprise. In Proc. CHI. 3025–3037.
[5] Elad Kravi et al. 2016. One Query, Many Clicks: Analysis of Queries with Multiple
Clicks by the Same User. In Proc. CIKM. 1423–1432.
[6] Karin Mauge, Khash Rohanimanesh, and Jean-David Ruvini. 2012. Structuring
e-Commerce Inventory. In Proc. ACL. 805–814.
[7] Neel Sundaresan. 2011. Recommender Systems at the Long Tail. In Proc. RecSys.
1–6.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR'17, August 7–11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan
© 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). 978-1-4503-5022-8/17/08.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3077136.3096469

1351

