SIRIP 2: Start-Up Research and Academic Collaboration

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Making Ads More Relevant
Innovations in Digital Advertising
Sudong Chung

Wider Planet, Co. Ltd.
Seoul, 06655, South Korea
sudong@widerplanet.com
ABSTRACT

KEYWORDS

In the past decades , we found ourselves spending more and
more time on the Internet. As we surf the Internet longer, we are
exposed to digital advertisement more. Some of us got used to it
and even take it for granted. And some of us sought for a remedy
and use ad-blocking software. This could be an end of story, especially if we were not computer scientists who care about information relevance.
1

Digital Advertising; Ad Tech; Big Data

BIO
Sudong Chung is Co-founder and CTO of Wider Planet, Co. Ltd.,
which is developing a global digital advertising platform utilizing massive online and offline data.
Sudong has over 15 years of industrial experiences in the internet search engine and digital advertising platform development.

Who are making those advertisements? And why? We know
that the television networks make money by broadcasting tv
commercial to their viewers. They use the money to create contents and make profit. Therefore, it is obvious that we watch
commercial to watch their shows. Of course, some ad-free television networks make funds from monthly subscription fee.

Prior to Wider Planet, Sudong was a principal program manager
in Microsoft working on Bing search engine. He also worked for
Yahoo and Overture in search engine development and search
advertising system development.

But why do we feel that we see more ads online than before?
Are we right about it? The answer is Yes. We are seeing more
ads than before and it is not only because we spend more time
online but also because more marketing money has shifted from
offline to online marketing.
The increase in digital marketing is due to several reasons; 1)
increase of time spent online 2) descent of publishers’ offline
business 3) innovations in digital advertising technology and
creatives.
In this talk, I will talk about the history of digital advertising and
the recent innovations in advertising technologies to make ads
more relevant to individual viewer. Also, I will explain why the
advanced machine learning and massive user data are behind the
innovations.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full
citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must
be honored. For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.
SIGIR '17, August 07-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan
© 2017 Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5022-8/17/08.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3077136.3096465

1353

