SIRIP 2: Start-Up Research and Academic Collaboration

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Semantic Query Understanding
Ricardo Baeza-Yates

NTENT
1808 Aston Ave.
Carlsbad, CA 92008, U.S.A.
rbaeza@acm.org

ABSTRACT

EXAMPLE

Queries are often ambiguous and can be interpreted in many ways,
even by humans. Hence, semantic query understanding’s primary
objective is to understand the intention behind the query. This implies first predicting the language used to express the query. Second,
parsing the query according to that language. Third, extracting the
entities and concepts mentioned in the query. Finally, based on all
this information, we predict one or more possible intentions with
a certain probability, which is particularly important for ambiguous queries. These scores will be one of the inputs for the final
semantic ranking. For example, given the query “bond”, possible results for query understanding are a financial instrument, the movie
character, a chemical reaction, or a term for endearment.
Semantic ranking refers to ranking search results using semantic
information. In a standard search engine, a rank is computed by
using signals or features coming from the search query, from the
documents in the collection being searched and from the search
context, such as the language and device being used. Using semantic
processing, we also add semantic features that come from concepts
present in the knowledge base that appear in the query and semantically match documents in the collection. To do this efficiently, all
documents are preprocessed semantically to build an index that
includes semantic annotations.
To accomplish semantic ranking, we use machine learning in
several stages. The first stage selects the data sources that we should
use to answer the query. In the second stage, each data source generates a set of answers using “learning to rank.” The third and final
stage ranks these data sources, selecting and ordering the intentions as well as the answers inside each intention (e.g., news) that
will appear in the final composite answer. All these techniques are
language independent, but may use language dependent features.

In the following diagram we show the whole process for the query
“bond”, where the final output is a ranked list of intentions. We also
include search functionalities like spelling correction, query auto
completion, and query suggestion.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems → Retrieval models and ranking; Learning to rank; Business intelligence;

KEYWORDS
Semantic search; query understanding; query intention; semantic
ranking; learning to rank.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’17, August 07-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan
© 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5022-8/17/08
https://doi.org/10.1145/3077136.3096472

1357

