SIRIP 3: Research at Large-scale Search Engines

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Cross-Lingual Information Retrieve in Sogou Search
JingFang Xu

Feifei Zhai

Zhengshan Xue

Sohu.com internet plaza, No.1 Park,
Zhongguancun East Road, Haidian
District, Beijing 100084, P.R.China
xujingfang@sogou-inc.com

Sohu.com internet plaza, No.1 Park,
Zhongguancun East Road, Haidian
District, Beijing 100084, P.R.China
zhaifeifei@sogou-inc.com

Sohu.com internet plaza, No.1 Park,
Zhongguancun East Road, Haidian
District, Beijing 100084, P.R.China
xuezhengshan@sogou-inc.com

For example, if a user wants to find some information about the
clothing brand “Ports”, and he inputs Chinese term "宝姿 (baozi)"
for searching. The translation system will translate "宝姿 (baozi)"
into "Ports", which is correct. However, when “Ports” serves as
the English query, search engine doesn’t know what exactly the
user needs, the clothing brand, the term used for communication
in computer networking, or a harbour. As a result, it will
consider all the possible search intentions, and return many
results that are actually not what the user wants. Therefore, how
to keep the original meaning of source language query and let it
supervise the search process is one problem we need to solve.

ABSTRACT
In recent years, more and more Chinese people desires to be able
to access the large amount of foreign language information and
understand what is happening all over the world. However,
language barrier is always a problem to them. In order to break
the language barrier and connect Chinese people to the foreign
language information in the world, Sogou has built a crosslingual information retrieval (CLIR) system named Sogou English
(http://english.sogou.com), which enables Chinese people to
search and browse foreign language information with Chinese.
In Sogou English, when the user inputs a Chinese query, it will
first translate the Chinese query into English, and then search
over the Internet, and finally translate the search results into
Chinese so that users can understand them better. Hence with
Sogou English, people can read and browse the information from
English world without actually knowing English.

Another challenge is the translation ambiguity when we
translate the search results into Chinese. Currently, same as the
traditional machine translation setting, different sentences are
translated separately. Therefore, the same source language
phrase in different search results might be translated into
different target phrases (due to the different context), or even
wrong translations (lack of context). For example, suppose now
we have got some search results about movie “Doctor Strange
(Its Chinese translation is 奇异博士)”. One search result contains
a phrase “IMDB score”, indicating the translation system that it
is about a movie. By this context, the translation system is able
to follow the word distribution in movie domain implicitly, and
correctly translate “Doctor Strange” into “奇异博士”. However,
for the results lacking that kind of information, it is possible that
the translation system prefers to follow the general word
distribution from its training data, and wrongly translate “Doctor
Strange” into “奇怪医生 (means weird medical doctor)”, or “陌生
医生 (means strange medical doctor)”. Thus, how to get more
accurate and robust translation by using the context from all
search results is also a big challenge to us.

Sogou English is built based on the second largest search engine
in China, Sogou Search. Besides, the neural machine translation
(NMT) technology is adopted to do the translation part. As far as
we know, Sogou English is the first CLIR system in the world that
integrates NMT into search engine. NMT has made a significant
progress in recent years, and by leveraging the advantages of
NMT, Sogou English is able to produce high-quality translation
outputs, especially for the search results to help people
understand them. However, we are still facing many technical
challenges arising from integrating the translation system into
search engine.
One challenge is the ambiguity originates from the polysemy
phenomenon in target language. In query translation process,
when an input query is translated into a target language word
that has several different meanings, search engine does not
know which meaning the user wants to utilize for searching.

In this talk, we will give a brief introduction to our efforts on
building our CLSI system, Sogou English: the architecture, the
challenges we face and our current solutions.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this
work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.
SIGIR '17, August 07-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan
© 2017 Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5022-8/17/08.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3077136.3096463

1361

