Doctoral Consortium

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Health Misinformation in Search and Social Media
Amira Ghenai

University of Waterloo
200 University Ave W
Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1
aghenai@uwaterloo.ca
the media confirmed to be false by reliable sources Coady [1] . The
dissertation work shall focus on two research questions regarding
effort. RQ1: How search engine influences people’s health-care decision and possible reasons behind this influence .We are planning
to design controlled laboratory studies in order to understand the
reasons behind people being influenced by online search results.
People might be influenced because of a large number of factors,
such as: prior-knowledge, the trustworthiness of sources, visual
display aids. For space limitation reasons, we will only explain the
experimental setup of one user study that looks into the affect of
the prior-knowledge factor. During this specific study, we will ask
about the efficacy of two types of medical treatments: treatments
that are popular for a specific medical condition, assuming people
already have a prior knowledge about them, and rare treatments
for medical condition that few people know about. Later, we will
ask participants to decide whether the treatment is helpful or not
for the specific medical condition after being exposed to correct and
incorrect search result pages. Based on the participants’ answers, if
there is a statistical significance between popular and non-popular
treatments, then prior-knowledge has an impact on people’s healthcare decisions. RQ2: How do health rumors in social media effect the
belavior of people susceptible rumors i.e. are they more likely to have
some specific event/outcome/personal experience. To achieve this,
we will first build a medical rumor classifier that identifies who is
spreading rumors. Next, we aim to understand how the detected
rumors affect people’s health-care decisions. Inspired by the work
done by Olteanu et al. [4], we plan to use stratified propensity score
matching analysis in order to understand possible personal experiences rumor cohorts might have. We define the treatment group as
people who spread rumors about a specific medical treatment for a
specific illness and the control group as people who share general
information about the medical illness. Possible outcomes we might
be looking at are: word likelihood/distribution explaning personal
experiences behavior [2], anxiety level, possible medical related
outcomes such as immunization decisions, social network behavior
such as the tweeting rates.

ABSTRACT
People regularly use web search and social media to investigate
health related issues. This type of Internet data might contain
misinformation i.e. incorrect information which contradicts current
established medical understanding. If people are influenced by the
presented misinformation in these sources, they can make harmful
decisions about their health. My research goal is to investigate
the effect of Internet data on people’s health. Working with my
colleagues on this topic, our current findings suggest that there
is a potential for people to be harmed by search engine results.
Furthermore, we successfully built a high precision approach to
track misinformation in social media. In this paper, I briefly discuss
my current work including background key references. Thereafter,
I propose a research plan to understand possible mechanisms of
misinformation’s effect on people and its possible impacts on public
health. Later, I will explain the suggested research methodology to
achieve the research plan.

KEYWORDS
User Study, Information Retrieval, Health Search, Social Computing
for Health, Rumor, Misinformation, Social Media Analysis, Public
health monitoring
ACM Reference format:
Amira Ghenai. 2017. Health Misinformation in Search and Social Media. In
Proceedings of SIGIR ’17, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan, August 07-11, 2017, 1 pages.
DOI: 10.1145/3077136.3084153

1

RESEARCH PROPOSAL

Using the massive available amount of online data, we can potentialy help improve people’s health in a direct and quantitative way.
In the past, researchers used to rely on medical reports from hospitals and health clinics in order to conduct health-related research.
It was not until the 1960s that steps towards automating data collection took place [3]. As much as the old data resources seem to
be reliable and focused, this kind of data does not cover all public
health aspects but focuses more on the sickness conditions of the
health-domain [5, p. 8].
The purpose of this work is to use Internet data (search engine
result pages, social media) in order to understand how information
and, more specifically, misinformation affect people’s health where
misinformation is defined as a piece of information spreading in

REFERENCES
[1] David Coady. 2006. Rumour has it. International Journal of Applied Philosophy
20, 1 (2006), 41–53.
[2] Munmun De Choudhury and Emre Kıcıman. 2017. The Language of Social
Support in Social Media and its Effect on Suicidal Ideation Risk. (2017).
[3] Simon de Lusignan and Chris van Weel. 2006. The use of routinely collected
computer data for research in primary care: opportunities and challenges. Family
Practice 23, 2 (2006), 253–263.
[4] Alexandra Olteanu, Onur Varol, and Emre Kıcıman. 2017. Distilling the Outcomes
of Personal Experiences: A Propensity-scored Analysis of Social Media. CSCW.
[5] Elad Yom-Tov. 2016. Crowdsourced Health: How What You Do on the Internet Will
Improve Medicine. Mit Press.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan
© 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). 978-1-4503-5022-8/17/08.
DOI: 10.1145/3077136.3084153

1371

