Doctoral Consortium

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Dynamic Personalized Ranking of Facets for Exploratory Search
Esraa Ali

ADAPT Centre
School of Computer Science and Statistics,
Trinity College Dublin
Dublin, Ireland
esraa.ali@adaptcentre.ie
facets is a time consuming task which relies upon domain experts.
Second, it is not practical on large, multi-domain datasets. Even oneoff automatic facet generation and ranking might not be suitable
for data that changes and grows over time. Lastly, the relevance of
facets can be user, query and context dependant.
I am proposing a personalized approach to the dynamic ranking
of facets. The approach combines different sources of information
to recommend the most relevant facets. The first source is the
knowledge-base from which the facets are originally generated.
The second is facets generated from the top-ranked documents in
a search system. The user search query is submitted to a general
search engine and the top ranked documents are used to add context
to the ranking process. Finally, the third source uses a user interests
profile, which is collected from social media and the user’s behavior
in the system. These sources contribute to the final ranking score
to reflect the importance of facets without ignoring user interests.
My proposed research aims to answer the following research
questions: RQ1: To what extent does the addition of features from
retrieved search results from a general web search improve the
computation of facet relevance?. RQ2: What is the most effective
method to incorporate personal interests and user usage data into
the ranking process?. RQ3: Does personalising facet ranking have
a measurable impact upon the user search experience?
The primary area of contribution of this work is the proposal
of a personalised ranking model for facets generated from a knowledge base. This model also incorporates the user’s interests, and
features from the top-ranked search results using the same query
submitted to a general web search engine, into the ranking process.
The area of contribution is novel and not explored by earlier research. Another potential contribution is the development of an
evaluation approach and a benchmark dataset to validate such a
faceted search system.

ABSTRACT
Faceted Search Systems (FSS) have gained prominence in research
as one of the exploratory search approaches that support complex
search tasks. They provide facets to educate users about the information space and allow them to refine their search query and
navigate back and forth between resources on a single results page.
When the information available in the collection being searched
across increases, so does the number of associated facets. This can
make it impractical to display all of the facets at once.
To tackle this problem, FSS employ methods for facet ranking.
Ranking methods can be based on the information structure, the
textual queries issued by the user, or the usage logs. Such methods
reflect neither the importance of the facets nor the user interests. I
focus on the problem of ranking facets from knowledge bases (KB)
and Linked Open Data (LOD). KB have the advantage of containing
high quality structured data. With the increasing size and complexity of LOD datasets, the task of deciding which facets should be
manifest to the user, and in which order, becomes more difficult.
Facets are usually extracted from entity attributes. In reality, entities belong to several categories, as a result they inherit attributes
from their parent categories. Determining which attributes best
characterize a set of entities is not a trivial task. For example, the
attributes related to Barack Obama as a U.S. president are likely to
be more important than those related to him being an author.
In addition, the relevance of attributes or facets can be subjective. It varies not only from one person to another but also for
the same person from one situation to another. Users’ knowledge,
interests and therefore search needs evolve with time. Maintaining
an updated user profile and reflecting that in the search results adds
complexity to the problem. Moreover, the idea of personalizing
exploratory search can be challenging and tricky, since personalization in IR (specifically precision-oriented search engines) implicitly
implies narrowing and focusing the information space to retrieve
the most relevant results according to the users’ interests and desires. On the contrary, exploratory search systems are typically
recall-oriented and they favor covering as much from the information space as possible. They also encourage diversifying the user
knowledge to help them learn and discover the unknown.
The generation of a ranked list of facets should be a dynamic
process for a number of reasons. First of all, manually setting up

CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems → Information retrieval diversity; Rank
aggregation; Personalization;

KEYWORDS
Exploratory Search, Personalization, Faceted Search, Knowledge
Bases
ACM Reference format:
Esraa Ali. 2017. Dynamic Personalized Ranking of Facets for Exploratory
Search. In Proceedings of SIGIR ’17, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan, August 07-11,
2017, 1 pages.
DOI: 10.1145/3077136.3084157

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan
© 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). 978-1-4503-5022-8/17/08.
DOI: 10.1145/3077136.3084157

1379

