Doctoral Consortium

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Searchbots: Using Chatbots in Collaborative
Information-seeking Tasks
Sandeep Avula

University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
asandeep@unc.edu
possible differences between users’ engagement with searchbots
that intervene and explicitly request the necessary information in
a scripted dialogue versus searchbots that intervene only after extracting/inferring the necessary information from the conversation.
RG3: Our third and final research goal will be to develop and
evaluate an end-to-end brokered system. We envision a system that
monitors a conversation between two or more users and performs
several predictive tasks. The first task will be to predict which
searchbot (if any) would be useful for the current task. Predicting
a relevant searchbot is related to the task of vertical selection in
aggregated search [1]. To this end, we will build on prior work
to develop algorithms that predict searchbot relevance for a given
conversation between users. The second task will be to predict
when to intervene. The third task will be to predict how to intervene.
We will develop techniques that can analyze the conversation and
extract or infer the bits of information needed by a searchbot to
produce contextually relevant results.
The proposed dissertation research will proceed in two phases.
For Phase 1, we have conducted a Wizard of Oz study to investigate
the questions in research goals RG1 and RG2. In Phase 2, we will
use the insights gained in Phase 1 to develop and evaluate models
for the predictive tasks outlined in RG3.

ABSTRACT
The popularity of messaging platforms such as Slack has given
rise to thousands of different chatbots that users can engage with
individually or as a group. The proposed dissertation research will
investigate the use of searchbots (i.e., chatbots that perform specific
search operations) during collaborative information-seeking tasks.
Specifically, we will address the following research goals.
RG1: Our first research goal will be to investigate the use of
searchbots in a collaborative search scenario. The goal of collaborative search is to develop systems that help two or more people collaborate synchronously or asynchronously on information-seeking
tasks. Collaborative search systems such as SearchTogether [6],
Coagmento [7], CollabSearch [8], and ResultsSpace [2] allow users
to share information, communicate asynchronously or in real-time,
and provide interactive visualizations that raise awareness of each
user’s search activities, allowing users to learn from each other’s
search strategies and avoid duplicating work. Prior research shows
that while people often search in pairs and in larger groups, they
do so without the use of specialized search tools and instead coordinate via “out-of-channel” communication tools such as email,
text messaging, phone, and social media [4, 5].
Our first goal will be to investigate the use of searchbots during
real-time collaborative search tasks. Our interest in the use of
searchbots for collaborative search echoes a suggestion made by
Morris [5] to develop lightweight collaborative search tools over
existing communication platforms.
RG2: Our second research goal will investigate how users perceive and engage with searchbots that intervene without an explicit
request. To this end, we will consider several research questions.
First, we will investigate the different factors that influence users’
decisions to engage or not engage with a searchbot that intervenes
dynamically. As an example, prior research on dynamic help systems found that users often avoid assistance tools due to the cost of
cognitively disengaging with the task at hand [3]. In this respect,
users may avoid engaging with a searchbot if they are already
searching on their own. Second, we will investigate whether the
manner of intervention influences users’ perceptions and actions.
Searchbots typically require specific bits of contextual information
in order to produce useful search results. Searchbots that require
multiple bits of information explicitly request this information from
users before producing the search results. We will investigate the

KEYWORDS
Chatbots; Collaborative Search; Intelligent Agents
Acknowledgments: This work is supported in part by NSF grant
IIS-1451668. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, and recommendations expressed in this paper are the author’s and do not necessarily
reflect those of the sponsor.

REFERENCES
[1] Jaime Arguello. 2017. Aggregated Search. Foundations and Trends® in Information
Retrieval 10, 5 (2017), 365–502.
[2] Robert Capra, Annie Chen, Katie Hawthorne, and Jaime Arguello. 2012. ResultsSpace: An experimental collaborative search environment. ASIST (2012).
[3] Garett Dworman and Stephanie Rosenbaum. 2004. Helping users to use help:
improving interaction with help systems. In CHI. ACM.
[4] Meredith Ringel Morris. 2008. A Survey of Collaborative Web Search Practices.
In CHI. ACM.
[5] Meredith Ringel Morris. 2013. Collaborative Search Revisited. In CSCW. ACM.
[6] Meredith Ringel Morris and Eric Horvitz. 2007. SearchTogether: An Interface
for Collaborative Web Search. In UIST. ACM.
[7] Chirag Shah. 2010. Coagmento-a collaborative information seeking, synthesis
and sense-making framework. CSCW (2010).
[8] Zhen Yue, Shuguang Han, and Daqing He. 2012. An investigation of search
processes in collaborative exploratory web search. ASIST (2012).

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’17, August 07-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan
© 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). 978-1-4503-5022-8/17/08.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3077136.3084155

1375

