Doctoral Consortium

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Examining Information on Social Media: Topic Modelling, Trend
Prediction and Community Classification
Anjie Fang

Department of Computing Science
University of Glasgow
Glasgow G12 8QQ, UK
a.fang.1@research.gla.ac.uk
Third, we aim to model and predict the topical trend. Given the
timestamps of social media posts within topics, a topical trend can
be modelled as a continuous distribution over time. Therefore, we
argue that the future trends of topics can be predicted by estimating the density function of their continuous time distribution. By
examining the future topical trend, social scientists can ensure the
timeliness of their focused events. Politicians and policymakers
can keep abreast of the topics that remain salient over time.
Finally, we aim to offer a general method that can quickly obtain a large training dataset for constructing a social media user
classifier. A social media post contains hashtags and entities. These
hashtags (e.g. “#YesScot” in Scottish Independence Referendum)
and entities (e.g. job title or parties’ name) can reflect the community affiliation of a social media user. We argue that a large and
reliable training dataset can be obtained by distinguishing the usage
of these hashtags and entities. Using the obtained training dataset,
a social media user community classifier can be quickly achieved,
and then used as input to assist in examining the different topics
discussed in communities.
In conclusion, we have identified four aspects for assisting social
scientists to better understand the discussed topics on social media
networks. We believe that the proposed tools and approaches can
help to examine the exchanges of topics among communities on
social media networks.

ABSTRACT
In the past decade, the use of social media networks (e.g. Twitter)
increased dramatically becoming the main channels for the mass
public to express their opinions, ideas and preferences, especially
during an election or a referendum [5, 7]. Both researchers and the
public are interested in understanding what topics are discussed
during a real social event [10], what are the trends of the discussed
topics [8] and what is the future topical trend [9]. Indeed, modelling
such topics as well as trends offer opportunities for social scientists
to continue a long-standing research, i.e. examine the information
exchange between people in different communities (e.g. in [6]).
We argue that computing science approaches can adequately
assist social scientists to extract topics from social media data, to
predict their topical trends, or to classify a social media user (e.g. a
Twitter user) into a community. However, while topic modelling
approaches and classification techniques have been widely used,
challenges still exist, such as 1) existing topic modelling approaches
can generate topics lacking of coherence for social media data [4,
10]; 2) it is not easy to evaluate the coherence of topics [2, 3];
3) it can be challenging to generate a large training dataset for
developing a social media user classifier. Hence, we identify four
tasks to solve these problems and assist social scientists.
Initially, we aim to propose topic coherence metrics that effectively evaluate the coherence of topics generated by topic modelling
approaches. Such metrics are required to align with human judgements. Since topic modelling approaches cannot always generate
useful topics [1], it is necessary to present users with the most
coherent topics using the coherence metrics. Moreover, an effective coherence metric helps us evaluate the performance of our
proposed topic modelling approaches.
The second task is to propose a topic modelling approach that
generates more coherent topics for social media data. We argue
that the use of time dimension of social media posts helps a topic
modelling approach to distinguish the word usage differences over
time, and thus allows to generate topics with higher coherence as
well as their trends. A more coherent topic with its trend allows
social scientists to quickly identify the topic subject and to focus
on analysing the connections between the extracted topics with
the social events, e.g. an election.

REFERENCES
[1] Anjie Fang, Craig Macdonald, Iadh Ounis, and Philip Habel. 2016. Examining
the Coherence of the Top Ranked Tweet Topics. In Proc. of SIGIR.
[2] Anjie Fang, Craig Macdonald, Iadh Ounis, and Philip Habel. 2016. Topics in
Tweets: A User Study of Topic Coherence Metrics for Twitter Data. In Proc. of
ECIR.
[3] Anjie Fang, Craig Macdonald, Iadh Ounis, and Philip Habel. 2016. Using Word
Embedding to Evaluate the Coherence of Topics from Twitter Data. In Proc. of
SIGIR.
[4] Anjie Fang, Craig Macdonald, Iadh Ounis, Philip Habel, and Xiao Yang. 2017.
Exploring Time-Sensitive Variational Bayesian Inference LDA for Social Media
Data. In Proc. of ECIR.
[5] Anjie Fang, Iadh Ounis, Philip Habel, Craig Macdonald, and Nut Limsopatham.
2015. Topic-centric Classification of Twitter User’s Political Orientation. In Proc.
of SIGIR.
[6] Philip D Habel. 2012. Following the opinion leaders? The dynamics of influence
among media opinion, the public, and politicians. Political Communication 29, 3
(2012), 257–277.
[7] Haewoon Kwak, Changhyun Lee, Hosung Park, and Sue Moon. 2010. What is
Twitter, a social network or a news media?. In Proc. of WWW.
[8] Oren Tsur and Ari Rappoport. 2012. What’s in a hashtag?: content based prediction of the spread of ideas in microblogging communities. In Proc. of ICWSM.
[9] Xingqi Wang, Lei Qi, Chan Chen, Jingfan Tang, and Ming Jiang. 2014. Grey System Theory based prediction for topic trend on Internet. Engineering Applications
of Artificial Intelligence 29 (2014), 191–200.
[10] Wayne Xin Zhao, Jing Jiang, Jianshu Weng, Jing He, Ee-Peng Lim, Hongfei Yan,
and Xiaoming Li. 2011. Comparing twitter and traditional media using topic
models. In Proc. of ECIR.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’17, August 07-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan
© 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). 978-1-4503-5022-8/17/08
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3077136.3084156

1377

