Doctoral Consortium

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Deep Collaborative Filtering Approaches for Context-Aware
Venue Recommendation
Jarana Manotumruksa

University of Glasgow
Glasgow, Scotland, UK
j.manotumruksa.1@research.gla.ac.uk
generate personalised venues to users and 2) propose a sampling
criteria and pairwise ranking approach that applies the state-ofthe-art geographical and social probabilistic models to enhance the
performance of the BPR model for venue recommendation.
Recently, Deep Neural Network models (DNN) have yielded
success on tasks such as speech recognition, computer vision and
natural language processing. However, the exploration of DNN
in recommender systems has received relatively less scrutiny. Although some recent advances have applied DNNs to recommendation tasks and shown promising results, they mostly used DNNs
to model auxiliary information, such as social links and the textual content of comments. In particular, we proposed simple yet
effective approaches [1–3] that exploit word embeddings to model
users’ preference and the characteristics of venues based on textual
content of comments. Various recent sophisticated DNN algorithms
(e.g. Covolutional Neural Networks) that exploit word embeddings
to represent textual contents have been shown to be effective in
various applications (e.g. text classification). However, such learning algorithms have not widely applied to venue recommendation.
Moreover, with regards to modelling the key collaborative filtering effect, our proposed approaches [1–3] are still based on MF,
i.e. combining the users and items’ latent factors using an inner
product. To address the aforementioned challenges, we need to explore various sophisticated DNN techniques to 1) effectively model
the users’ preferences and the characteristic of venues based on
user-generated data on LBSNs in a collaborative manner, 2) rank
relevant venues that might interest users based on their preferences
and surrounding context using learning-to-rank models and 3) incorporate implicit feedback and the user-generated data to enhance
the effectiveness of CAVR. In particular, based on the previous successes of the DNN approaches for recommendation systems, which
exploit convolutional and recurrent neural networks to model the
user’s temporal preferences, we plan to build a Collaborative DNN
Framework for a CAVR system that learns the user’s temporal
preferences from their historical implicit feedback (e.g. check-ins),
other additional information (social links and textual content of
comments) and their current context (e.g. user’s location).

ABSTRACT
In recent years, vast amounts of user-generated data have being created on Location-Based Social Networks (LBSNs) such as Yelp and
Foursquare. Making effective personalised venue suggestions to
users based on their preferences and surrounding context is a challenging task. Context-Aware Venue Recommendation (CAVR) is an
emerging topic that has gained a lot of attention from researchers,
where context can be the user’s current location for example. Matrix
Factorisation (MF) is one of the most popular collaborative filteringbased techniques, which can be used to predict a user’s rating on
venues by exploiting explicit feedback (e.g. users’ ratings on venues).
However, such explicit feedback may not be available, particularly
for inactive users, while implicit feedback is easier to obtain from
LBSNs as it does not require the users to explicitly express their
satisfaction with the venues. In addition, the MF-based approaches
usually suffer from the sparsity problem where users/venues have
very few rating, hindering the prediction accuracy. Although previous works on user-venue rating prediction have proposed to alleviate the sparsity problem by leveraging user-generated data such as
social information from LBSNs, research that investigates the usefulness of Deep Neural Network algorithms (DNN) in alleviating the
sparsity problem for CAVR remains untouched or partially studied.

1

OVERVIEW

The goal of venue recommender systems is to find a specific and
ordered list of venues that are most appealing to the users, known
as the top-K venue recommendation task. Therefore, we plan to
explore a number of ranking algorithms (e.g. Bayesian Personalised
Ranking (BPR) [4], a pairwise approach) that exploit an MF-based
approach to generate effective ranked list of venue suggestion to
the users. Traditional BPR models typically suffer from the sparsity
problem that hinders the quality of personalised venue suggestion. A common approach that enhances the performance of the
BPR models under the sparsity condition is to extend the sampling
criterion and pairwise ranking function of BPR to incorporate additional information (e.g. social links and geographical information of
venues). To alleviate the sparsity problem, we we plan to 1) propose
a novel Personalised pairwise Ranking Framework with Multiple
sampling Criteria (PRFMC) for venue recommendation that exploits
probabilistic models to effectively sample negative examples and

REFERENCES
[1] Jarana Manotumruksa, Craig Macdonald, and Iadh Ounis. 2016. Modelling User
Preferences using Word Embeddings for Context-Aware Venue Recommendation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.07828 (2016).
[2] Jarana Manotumruksa, Craig Macdonald, and Iadh Ounis. 2016. Regularising
factorised models for venue recommendation using friends and their comments.
In Proc. of CIKM. 1981–1984.
[3] Jarana Manotumruksa, Craig Macdonald, and Iadh Ounis. 2017. Matrix Factorisation with Word Embeddings for Rating Prediction on Location-Based Social
Networks. In Proc. of ECIR. 647–654.
[4] Steffen Rendle, Christoph Freudenthaler, Zeno Gantner, and Lars SchmidtThieme. 2009. BPR: Bayesian personalized ranking from implicit feedback. In
Proc. of UAI. 452–461.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’17, August 7–11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan.
© 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5022-8/17/08.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3077136.3084159

1383

