Doctoral Consortium

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Utilizing Online Social Media for Disaster Relief: Practical
Challenges in Retrieval
Moumita Basu
Department of CST, Indian Institute of Engineering Science and Technology Shibpur, India
Social Informatics Research Group, Indian Institute of Management Calcutta, India
moumitabasu0979@gmail.com

ABSTRACT
In recent years, several disaster events (e.g., earthquakes in NepalIndia and Italy, terror attacks in Paris and Brussels) have proven
the crucial role of Online Social Media (OSM) in providing actionable situational information. However, in such media, the crucial
information is typically obscured by a lot of insignificant information (e.g., personal opinions, prayers for victims). Moreover, when
time is critical, owing to the rapid speed and huge volume of microblogs, it is infeasible for human subjects to go through all the
tweets posted. Hence, automated IR methods are needed to extract
the relevant information from the deluge of posts.
Though several methodologies have been developed for tasks like
classification, summarization, etc. of social media data posted during disasters [5], there are still several research challenges that
need to be addressed for effectively utilising social media data (e.g.,
microblogs) for aiding disaster relief operations.
Research challenges: We have identified the following challenges
in developing IR systems for OSM text posted during disasters.
(i) Dealing with noisy vocabulary of OSM content: Microblogs often contains various spellings of the same word, that includes both
English words (like ‘epicentre’ and ‘epicenter’) as well as non-English
words (like ‘gurudwara’ and ‘gurdwara’). Moreover, on microblogging sites like Twitter, words are often shortened arbitrarily owing
to the strict restriction on the length of microblogs (e.g., ‘operation’
shortened to ‘oper’ or ‘ops’). Hence IR methodologies need to be
able to handle such arbitrary variations in spelling.
(ii) Need for improved models for retrieval and ranking: The context
and vocabulary of the microblogs are time-variant. For example,
at the initial phase of the 2015 Nepal-India earthquake, terms like
‘send’ and ‘airlifted’ were being used to indicate availability of resources (e.g. “Haryana Govt. airlifted 20,000 food packets”). However, in the later phases, terms like ‘distribute’ and ‘reach’ were
used to describe the availability of resources (e.g. “ISKON Kathmandu distributes food”). Thus retrieval schemes need to dynamically adapt to the fast-changing context and vocabulary for effective retrieval from OSM.
(iii) Need for better evaluation measures: From our discussions with
the NGOs who participate in relief works, we understood that a binary notion of relevance of OSM posts is not apt in disaster scenarios. For example, consider the two tweets “Urgent : Blood shortage
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be
honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’17, August 7–11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan
© 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5022-8/17/08.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3077136.3084160

1385

in Nepal. For Blood donation call Dr. Manita at <mobil-number> at
Nepal Red Cross” and “Lack of blood in blood bank in nepal. @BBCWorld @ibnlive”. Both the tweets convey the need of a resource
(here, blood), however the first one is much more important and actionable than the second one. Developing benchmark collections
containing such graded relevance is also a challenge.
(iv) Need for retrieval from multiple sources: When a disaster strikes,
responding authorities need to identify actionable information from
multiple sources such as crowdsourced data from Twitter, Facebook, closed group communication data like WhatsApp chats among
relief workers, and so on, for a comprehensive analysis of the situation. Further, data from different sources can be in different
languages, e.g., English, and local languages of the region where
the disaster has occurred. Hence, developing a common IR framework to extract data from such heterogeneous data sources is a
challenge that is yet to be addressed.
Work done: The main objective of this PhD work is to address the
aforementioned practical IR problems. As initial efforts towards
understanding the challenges, we have developed two datasets for
retrieval and summarisation of microblogs related to disasters, and
made them available to the research community [3, 4]. We have
also developed a context-specific stemming algorithm for noisy microblogs, that enabled significantly better retrieval of microblogs
(in English) as compared to the well-known Porter stemmer [2]. In
another ongoing work, we have proposed word embedding based
techniques for identifying tweets informing about resource needs
/ availabilities [1] – our proposed methodologies outperform prior
pattern matching based techniques. We will continue to improve
our proposed techniques in future.
Keywords: Online social media; Disaster Relief; Microblogs
Acknowledgement: This research is partially funded by ITRA,
DeITY, Govt. of India (Ref. No.: ITRA/15 (58)/Mobile/DISARM/05).

REFERENCES
[1] M. Basu, K. Ghosh, S. Das, R. Dey, S. Bandyopadhyay, and S. Ghosh. 2017. Identifying Post-Disaster Resource Needs and Availabilities from Microblogs. In Proc.
ASONAM.
[2] M. Basu, A. Roy, K. Ghosh, S. Bandyopadhyay, and S. Ghosh. 2017. A Novel
Word Embedding Based Stemming Approach for Microblog Retrieval during
Disasters. In Proc. ECIR.
[3] S. Ghosh and K. Ghosh. 2016. Overview of the FIRE 2016 Microblog track: Information Extraction from Microblogs Posted during Disasters. In Working notes
of FIRE 2016.
[4] S. Ghosh, K. Ghosh, T. Chakraborty, D. Ganguly, G. Jones, and M. FrancineMoens. 2017. First International Workshop on Exploitation of Social Media for
Emergency Relief and Preparedness (SMERP). In Proc. ECIR. http://computing.
dcu.ie/~dganguly/smerp2017/
[5] M. Imran, C. Castillo, F. Diaz, and S. Vieweg. 2015. Processing Social Media
Messages in Mass Emergency: A Survey. Comput. Surveys 47, 4 (June 2015),
67:1–67:38.

