Doctoral Consortium

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Multi-dimensional Formula Feature Modeling for Mathematical
Information Retrieval
Ke Yuan

Institute of Computer Science & Technology of Peking University
Beijing, China
yuanke@pku.edu.cn
summarization. In addition, if a formula is mainly demonstrated by
an article, other articles in a large scale corpus, that describe this
formula, would have more probabilities to cite this demonstrated
article. In order to find out the related concepts of formulae, we use
the citations which existed in its descriptions to represent it. Wang
et al. [2] proposed that the preceding and following sentences of a
formula are usually the description of it. Thus, we extract all the
descriptions of each formula from the dump of Wikipedia at first,
then built the formula citation graph according to the citations existed in the descriptions. Afterwards, we utilize the formula citation
graph to extract the related-concept features of formula by random
walk algorithms.
Secondly, the essential semantic features of formula are extracted.
This kind features are hardly represented by the presentation of formula (e.g., Content MathML). Therefore, we generate the descriptive
textual information of formulae by Recurrent Neural Networks with
a Long Short-Term Memory. The supervised end-to-end training
is performed using backpropagation. Then the descriptive textual
information formulae are used to extract the essential semantic
features of formulae through NLP approaches.
Afterwards, the temporal features of formula are extracted. The
extraction process of temporal features contains four-step: (1)
Match the query formula against the content within the sequential
corpus; (2) Score the matching terms of formula individually relative to the query; (3) Aggregate the best-matching terms of formula
associated with the same date; (4) Select the dates with the highest
scores and the datas is the temporal features of the formula.
After all the features of formulae are obtained, multiple similarity
criteria define a score used to sort candidates. Finally, the related
documents list is generated according to the similarity score of each
document.
Acknowledgements: This work is advised by Prof. Zhi Tang,
Liangcai Gao, Xiaozhong Liu and Dr. Zhuoren Jiang. This work is
sponsored by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(No. 61472014 and No. 61573028) and China Postdoctoral Science
Foundation (No. 2016M590019).

ABSTRACT
With the quick availability and growth of mathematical information worldwide, how to effectively retrieve the relevant information about mathematical formulae, has attracted increasing attention from the researchers of mathematical information retrieval
(MIR). Existing methods mainly focus on the appearance similarity
between formulae. However, there are more important formularelated information that could be explored, for instance, link relations between formulae, formula contexts and temporal information.
In this study, I propose a novel formula feature modeling method
for mathematical information retrieval. In more details, three new
formula features have been proposed for better representing mathematical formulae: formula-related concept features extracted from
link structure (Formula Citation Graph, FCG), essential semantic
features extracted from descriptive textual information of formulae
through Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) and temporal features
extracted from time-related information. All these features could
be used to index and retrieve formulae.

KEYWORDS
Mathematical information retrieval (MIR); Formula citation graph
(FCG); Formula features

1

INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION

Current Mathematical Information Retrieval (MIR) approaches perform well in identifying formulae that contain similar layout features [1, 4]. However, in most of the existing formula search engines,
the ‘broad’ mathematical features of formulae are seldom taken into
consideration. Here, ‘broad’ means we can explore more feature
dimensions for formulae. In this study, we extract features of formulae from four different aspects: layout, formula-related concept,
essential semantic and temporal. All these features are stored and
used to index and retrieve the related formulae. Since existing MIR
approaches perform well in the layout features extraction [2, 3],
we focus on how to extract the other three dimensional features of
formulae in this paper.
We extract the formula-related concept features through the
formula citation graph at first. The citations or references between
articles and formulae are important to demonstrating the association between them, and the article’s title in Wikipedia is a highly

REFERENCES
[1] Akiko Aizawa, Michael Kohlhase, Iadh Ounis, and Moritz Schubotz. 2014. NTCIR11 Math-2 Task Overview. In NTCIR. Citeseer.
[2] Yuehan Wang, Liangcai Gao, Simeng Wang, Zhi Tang, Xiaozhong Liu, and Ke
Yuan. 2015. WikiMirs 3.0: a hybrid MIR system based on the context, structure
and importance of formulae in a document. In Proceedings of the 15th ACM/IEEECS Joint Conference on Digital Libraries. ACM, 173–182.
[3] Ke Yuan, Liangcai Gao, Yuehan Wang, Xiaohan Yi, and Zhi Tang. 2016. A mathematical information retrieval system based on RankBoost. In Digital Libraries
(JCDL), 2016 IEEE/ACM Joint Conference on. IEEE, 259–260.
[4] Richard Zanibbi, Akiko Aizawa, Michael Kohlhase, Iadh Ounis, G Topić, and
K Davila. 2016. NTCIR-12 MathIR task overview. NTCIR, National Institute of
Informatics (NII) (2016).

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan
© 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). 978-1-4503-5022-8/17/08.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3077136.3084158

1381

