Workshop

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information
Retrieval and Natural Language Processing
for Digital Libraries (BIRNDL 2017)
Muthu Kumar Chandrasekaran

Kokil Jaidka

Philipp Mayr

School of Computing,
National University of Singapore, Singapore
muthu.chandra@comp.nus.edu.sg

School of Arts & Sciences,
University of Pennsylvania, USA
jaidka@sas.upenn.edu

GESIS – Leibniz Institute for the Social
Sciences, Germany
philipp.mayr@gesis.org

ABSTRACT

a knowledge transfer would be profitable for both sides. A good
overview of the symbiotic relationship that exists among bibliometrics, IR and natural language processing (NLP) has been presented
by Wolfram [6]. A report of the past BIRNDL workshop has been
published recently in The SIGIR Forum [1].
The goal of the BIRNDL workshop at SIGIR is to engage the IR
community about the open problems in academic search. Academic
search refers to the large, cross-domain digital repositories which
index research papers, such as the ACL Anthology, ArXiv, ACM
Digital Library, IEEE database, Web of Science and Google Scholar.
Currently, digital libraries collect and allow access to papers and
their metadata — including citations — but mostly do not analyze
the items they index. The scale of scholarly publications poses a
challenge for scholars in their search for relevant literature. Finding
relevant scholarly literature is the key theme of BIRNDL and sets
the agenda for tools and approaches to be discussed and evaluated
at the workshop.
Papers at the 2nd BIRNDL workshop will incorporate insights
from IR, bibliometrics and NLP to develop new techniques to address the open problems such as evidence-based searching, measurement of research quality, relevance and impact, the emergence
and decline of research problems, identification of scholarly relationships and influences and applied problems such as language
translation, question-answering and summarization. We will also
address the need for established, standardized baselines, evaluation
metrics and test collections. Towards the purpose of evaluating
tools and technologies developed for digital libraries, we are organizing the 3r d CL-SciSumm Shared Task based on the CL-SciSumm
corpus, which comprises over 500 computational linguistics (CL)
research papers, interlinked through a citation network.
The organizers of the 2nd BIRNDL workshop at SIGIR 20171
have previously organized other workshop series at premier IR
and CS venues - notably, the Bibliometric-enhanced Information
Retrieval (BIR) workshops in 2014, 2015 and 2016 at ECIR [4] and
the NLPIR4DL workshop at ACL-IJCNLP (2009). Most recently, the
BIRNDL workshop and the 2nd CL-SciSumm Shared Task were
co-located with JCDL 20162 [1], where 10 research papers and 10
system papers were presented3 (acceptance rate: 30%). In 2017, the
BIRNDL workshop takes this legacy forward with a focus on scholarly publications and data, and an updated scientific summarization
Shared Task for its participants.
This workshop will be relevant to scholars in computer and information science, specializing in IR and NLP. It will also be of

The large scale of scholarly publications poses a challenge for scholars in information seeking and sensemaking. Bibliometrics, information retrieval (IR), text mining and NLP techniques could help in
these search and look-up activities, but are not yet widely used. This
workshop is intended to stimulate IR researchers and digital library
professionals to elaborate on new approaches in natural language
processing, information retrieval, scientometrics, text mining and
recommendation techniques that can advance the state-of-the-art
in scholarly document understanding, analysis, and retrieval at
scale. The BIRNDL workshop at SIGIR 2017 will incorporate an invited talk, paper sessions and the third edition of the Computational
Linguistics (CL) Scientific Summarization Shared Task.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems → Information retrieval; Link and cocitation analysis; • Applied computing → Digital libraries and
archives;

KEYWORDS
Scientometrics; Information Retrieval; Digital Libraries; NLP; Summarization; Information Extraction; Citation analysis
ACM Reference format:
Muthu Kumar Chandrasekaran, Kokil Jaidka, and Philipp Mayr. 2017. Joint
Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and Natural
Language Processing for Digital Libraries (BIRNDL 2017). In Proceedings of
SIGIR’17, August 7–11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan., , 2 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3077136.3084370

1

INTRODUCTION

Over the past several years, the BIRNDL workshop and its parent
workshops are establishing themselves as the primary interdisciplinary venue for the cross- pollination of bibliometrics and information retrieval (IR) [5]. Our motivation as organizers of the
workshop started from the observation that both communities share
only a partial overlap; yet, the main discourse in both fields consists
of different approaches to solve similar problems. We believe that
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’17, August 7–11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan.
© 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5022-8/17/08.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3077136.3084370

1 http://wing.comp.nus.edu.sg/birndl-sigir2017/
2 http://wing.comp.nus.edu.sg/birndl-jcdl2016/
3 http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1610/

1421

Workshop

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

importance to all stakeholders in the publication pipeline: practitioners, publishers and policymakers. Today’s publishers continue
to provide new ways to support their consumers in disseminating
and retrieving the right published works to their audience. Formal
citation metrics are increasingly a factor in decision-making by
universities and funding bodies worldwide, making the need for
research in applying these metrics more pressing.

2

the CP are pre-identified as the text spans (i.e., citances), that cite
the RP.
Task 1a: For each citance, identify the spans of text (cited text
spans) in the RP that most accurately reflect the citance.
Task 1b: For each cited text span, identify what facet of the paper
it belongs to, from a predefined set of facets.
Task 2 (optional bonus task): Finally, generate a structured summary of the RP from the cited text spans of the RP. The length of
the summary should not exceed 250 words.
Evaluation: Task 1 will be scored by overlap of text spans measured by number of sentences in the system output vs gold standard.
Task 2 will be scored using the ROUGE family of metrics between
the system output, and i) human summaries, ii) community summaries comprising the cited text spans, and ii) the Abstract section
of the reference paper.
This task is continues to be of interest to a broad community
including those working in CL and NLP, especially in the subdisciplines of text summarization, discourse structure in scholarly
discourse, paraphrase, textual entailment and text simplification.

WORKSHOP TOPICS AND FORMAT

Our goal is to encourage insights from IR, NLP and CL for scholarly document understanding, document analysis and retrieval in
digital libraries. The papers presented at the workshop will touch
upon several topics, including (but not limited to) full-text analysis,
multimedia and multilingual analysis and alignment as well as the
application of citation-based NLP, information retrieval and information seeking techniques in digital libraries. More specifically, our
fields of interests include:
• Infrastructures for scientific text mining and IR
• Semantic and Network-based indexing, navigation, searching and browsing in structured data
• Discourse structure identification and argument mining from
scientific papers
• Summarization and question-answering for scholarly DLs
• Recommendation for scholarly papers, reviewers, citations
and publication venues
• Measurement and evaluation of quality and impact
• Metadata and controlled vocabularies for resource description and discovery; automatic metadata discovery, such as
language identification
• Disambiguation issues in scholarly DLs using NLP or IR
techniques; data cleaning and data quality.

2.1

3

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Microsoft Research Asia for their generous support in funding the
development, dissemination and organization of the CL-SciSumm dataset
and the Shared Task. We are also grateful to the co-organizers of the 1s t
BIRNDL workshop - Guillaume Cabanac, Ingo Frommholz, Min-Yen Kan
and Dietmar Wolfram, for their continued support and involvement.

Tentative Schedule of Events

The workshop will start with a keynote titled “Do “Future Work"
sections have a real purpose? Citation links and entailment for global
scientometric questions” by Dr. Simone Teufel (University of Cambridge). This session will be followed by regular research paper
presentations, overview papers and posters on the Shared Task.

2.2

OUTLOOK

This workshop is the first step to foster a reflection on interdisciplinarity, and the benefits that the disciplines Bibliometrics, IR and
NLP can derive from it in the Digital Libraries context. The authors
of accepted papers will be invited to submit extended versions of
their work to the International Journal on Digital Libraries (IJDL).
As an output of BIRNDL 2016, a special issue of IJDL on “Bibliometrics, Information Retrieval and Natural Language Processing in
Digital Libraries” is currently in preparation. In the future, we plan
to continue to host this series of workshops and Shared Tasks at
prominent IR, NLP and Digital Library venues.

REFERENCES
[1] Guillaume Cabanac, Muthu Kumar Chandrasekaran, Ingo Frommholz, Kokil
Jaidka, Min-Yen Kan, Philipp Mayr, and Dietmar Wolfram. 2016. Report on the
Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and Natural
Language Processing for Digital Libraries (BIRNDL 2016). SIGIR Forum 50, 2
(2016), 36–43. http://sigir.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/p036.pdf
[2] Kokil Jaidka, Muthu Kumar Chandrasekaran, Beatriz Fisas Elizalde, Rahul Jha,
Christopher Jones, Min-Yen Kan, Ankur Khanna, Diego Molla-Aliod, Dragomir R
Radev, Francesco Ronzano, et al. 2014. The computational linguistics summarization pilot task. In Proceedings of Text Analysis Conference. Gaithersburg, USA.
[3] Kokil Jaidka, Muthu Kumar Chandrasekaran, Sajal Rustagi, and Min-Yen Kan.
2016. Overview of the CL-SciSumm 2016 Shared Task. In In Proceedings of Joint
Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and NLP for Digital
Libraries (BIRNDL 2016).
[4] Philipp Mayr, Ingo Frommholz, and Guillaume Cabanac. 2016. Report on the 3rd
International Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval (BIR
2016). SIGIR Forum 50, 1 (2016), 28–34. http://sigir.org/files/forum/2016J/p028.pdf
[5] Philipp Mayr and Andrea Scharnhorst. 2015. Scientometrics and Information
Retrieval - weak-links revitalized. Scientometrics 102, 3 (2015), 2193–2199. https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s11192-014-1484-3
[6] Dietmar Wolfram. 2016. Bibliometrics, Information Retrieval and Natural Language Processing: Natural Synergies to Support Digital Library Research. In Proc.
of the BIRNDL Workshop 2016. 6–13. http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1610/paper1.pdf

The CL-SciSumm Shared Task
3r d

The
Computational Linguistics (CL) Scientific Summarization
Shared Task, sponsored by Microsoft Research Asia, will be conducted as a part of this workshop. This is the first medium-scale
shared task on scientific document summarization in the CL domain.
It follows up on and extends the successful CL Shared Tasks conducted as a part of BIRNDL 2016 [1], and within the BiomedSumm
Track at the Text Analysis Conference 2014 (TAC 2014) [2]. In the
CL-SciSumm 2016 [3] Shared Task, fifteen teams from six countries
signed up, and ten teams ultimately submitted and presented their
results.
The Shared Task comprises three sub-tasks in automatic research
paper summarization on a new corpus of research papers, as described below.
Given: A topic consisting of a Reference Paper (RP) and up to ten
Citing Papers (CPs) that all contain citations to the RP. Citations in

1422

