Workshop

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

First International Workshop on Conversational Approaches to
Information Retrieval (CAIR’17)
Hideo Joho

University of Tsukuba
hideo@slis.tsukuba.ac.jp

Lawrence Cavedon
RMIT University
lcavedon@rmit.edu.au

Milad Shokouhi

Filip Radlinski

Microsoft
milads@microsoft.com

Google
filiprad@google.com
technologies are currently designed to answer well formulated
queries, questions, or commands.
However, search engines have been effective at retrieving relevant information for ill-defined poorly expressed information needs,
which is not yet achieved by existing speech-based applications. A
report from SWIRL 2012 also identified conversational approaches
to IR as one of the most important directions in Information Retrieval [1]. Moreover, work evaluating spoken interfaces to search
engines demonstrate that replicating the standard approach to listing results is ineffective over a speech-only channel [2]. Therefore,
the new ways of speech-based access to search offers many opportunities and challenges in Information Retrieval to make search
interactions more conversational, and to develop innovative search
applications.
There have been several workshops related to CAIR‘17. ProActive Information Retrieval (ProActIR)1 was held in the 38th European Conference in Information Retrieval (ECIR‘16) in March
2016. It focused on proactive approaches to IR applications. Talking
with Conversational Agents in Collaborative Action workshop2
was held in the 20th ACM conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing (CSCW‘17) in February 2017.
Finally, First Intelligent Conversational User Interface Workshop
(ICUI‘17)3 was held in the 22nd annual meeting of the intelligent
user interfaces community (IUI‘17) in March 2017.
These workshops indicate strong interests in conversational approaches to computers and information systems. However, none
seems to focus on search applications and searching behaviour,
which are the strength of the proposed workshop.

ABSTRACT
Recent advances in commercial conversational services that allow naturally spoken and typed interaction, particularly for wellformulated questions and commands, have increased the need for
more human-centric interactions in information retrieval. The First
International Workshop on Conversational Approaches to Information Retrieval (CAIR‘17) brings together academic and industrial
researchers to create a forum for research on conversational approaches to search. A specific focus is on techniques that support
complex and multi-turn user-machine dialogues for information
access and retrieval, and multi-model interfaces for interacting with
such systems. We invite submissions addressing all modalities of
conversation, including speech-based, text-based, and multimodal
interaction. We also welcome studies of human-human interaction
(e.g., collaborative search) that can inform the design of conversational search applications, and work on evaluation of conversational
approaches.

CCS CONCEPTS
•Information systems → Information retrieval;

KEYWORDS
Conversational Search; Information Retrieval; Discourse and Dialogue

1

Jaime Arguello

University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill
jarguell@email.unc.edu

MOTIVATION FOR THE WORKSHOP

Recent advances in automatic speech recognition (ASR) technologies [3] have changed the way people seek information and interact
with devices. For example, search engine companies report that
approximately 20% of mobile queries are now via speech inputs
from mobile devices. Services such as Apple Siri and Google Now
enable users to find information using naturally spoken questions
rather than conventional keywords. In addition, products such
as Amazon Echo and Google Home have extended the context of
speech oriented interaction from mobile to office and home. These

2

THEME AND PURPOSE OF THE
WORKSHOP

The 1st International Workshop on Conversational Approaches to
Information Retrieval (CAIR‘17) aims to bring together academic
and industry researchers and developers to advance conversational
approaches to search applications. We are open to a variety of
modalities of conversation such as voice/speech based interaction,
text based interaction, or multimodal interaction. We also welcome
studies of human-human interaction (e.g., collaborative search) that
can inform the design of conversational search applications.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’17, August 07-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan
© 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). 978-1-4503-5022-8/17/08
DOI: 10.1145/3077136.3084368

1 https://sites.google.com/site/proactir/

2 https://talkingwithagents.wordpress.com/
3 https://iuiworkshop.github.io/

1423

Workshop

2.1

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

• Milad Shokouhi (Microsoft)
Organisation was also strengthened by the steering commmittee
members:
• Fernando Diaz (Spotify)
• Dilek Hakkani-Tür (Google)
• Mark Sanderson (RMIT University)
• Damiano Spina (RMIT University)
and program committee members:
• Fabio Crestani (University of Lugano)
• Roi Blanco (University of A Corua)
• Jeffrey Dalton (Google)
• Ido Guy (Yahoo Research)
• Jiepu Jiang (UMass Amherst)
• Gareth Jones (Dublin City University)
• Ben Lambert (Spotify)
• Karthik Raghunathan (MINDMELD)
• Ruihua Song (Microsoft)
• Amanda Stent (Yahoo!)
• Paul Thomas (Microsoft)
• Johanne R. Trippas (RMIT University)

Topics of interest

The workshop welcomes a broad range of studies that can contribute
to the development of conversational approaches to IR. Topics of
interest include (but are not limited to):
Query understanding and search process management.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Processing verbose natural language queries
Processing noisy ASR queries
Query intent disambiguation, clarification, confirmation
Query suggestion
Relevance feedback in conversational search
Voice-based search engine operations
Dialogue schema for conversational search

Search result description (presentation).
•
•
•
•
•

Audio-based search result presentation and summarization
Conversational navigation of search results
Knowledge graph presentation in conversational search
Conversational navigation of search results
Advertisements in audio-based search result presentation

Ranking algorithms.
• Ad-hoc spoken search
• Spoken search in session

5

Evaluation.
• Building test collections for conversational search
• Development of new metrics to measure effectiveness, engagement, satisfaction of conversational search
Applications.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

• Intelligent personal assistance
• Intelligent home assistance using voice / speech oriented
devices
• Proactive search/Recommendation
• Collaborative search
• Hands free search (e.g., in car, kitchen)
• Search for visually impaired users
• Search for low literacy users
• Integration with existing technologies

3

We thank SIGdial for their endorsement. We also thank PC members
for their constructive review of submissions. The first author was
funded in part by Microsoft Research Asia under MSR CORE-12
Project. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions described here are
the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the sponsors.

REFERENCES
[1] James Allan, Bruce Croft, Alistair Moffat, and Mark Sanderson. 2012. Frontiers,
Challenges, and Opportunities for Information Retrieval: Report from SWIRL
2012 the Second Strategic Workshop on Information Retrieval in Lorne. SIGIR
Forum 46, 1 (May 2012), 2–32. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2215676.2215678
[2] Nuzhah Gooda Sahib, Anastasios Tombros, and Tony Stockman. 2012. A Comparative Analysis of the Information-seeking Behavior of Visually Impaired and
Sighted Searchers. J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol. 63, 2 (Feb. 2012), 377–391. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/asi.21696
[3] W. Xiong, J. Droppo, X. Huang, F. Seide, M. Seltzer, A. Stolcke, D. Yu, and G.
Zweig. 2016. Achieving Human Parity in Conversational Speech Recognition.
ArXiv e-prints (Oct. 2016). arXiv:cs.CL/1610.05256

WORKSHOP DESIGN

CAIR’17 is a full day workshop. Two prominent speakers, Ron Kaplan (Amazon) and Jason Williams (Microsoft Research) are invited
to give a talk at the workshop, in addition to oral and poster presentations. The workshop concluds with a round table discussion
for future directions of conversational approaches to information
retrieval.

4

ENDORSEMENT

SIGdial (Special Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue)4 provided their endorsement to the workshop due to the relevance of
IR issues to their community. SIGdial also offered an opportunity
for a student travel grant. The collaboration greatly reinforced our
view of bridging relevant communities to advance the research and
development of effective conversational search applications.

ORGANISATION

Organising team consisted of the active members on this topic both
from industry and academic as follows.
• Jaime Arguello (University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill)
• Lawrence Cavedon (RMIT University)
• Hideo Joho (University of Tsukuba)
• Filip Radlinski (Google)

4 http://www.sigdial.org

1424

