Workshop

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

SIGIR 2017 Workshop on eCommerce (ECOM17)
Jon Degenhardt

Surya Kallumadi

eBay Inc
USA

Kansas State University
USA

Luo Si

Andrew Trotman

Alibaba Group Inc
USA, China

University of Otago
New Zealand

Yinghui Xu

Alibaba Group Inc
China

search systems. This workshop explores approaches for search
and recommendations of products. Although the task is the same
as web-page search (fulfill a user’s information need), the way in
which this is achieved is very much different. On product sites (such
as eBay, Flipkart, Amazon, and Alibaba), the traditional web-page
ranking features are either not present or are present in a different
form.
The entities that need to be discovered (the information that
fulfills the need) might be unstructured, associated with structure,
semi-structured, or have facets such as: price, ratings, title, description, seller location, and so on.
Domains with such facets raise interesting research challenges
such as a) relevance and ranking functions that take into account
the tradeoffs across various facets with respect to the input query
b) recommendations based on entity similarity c) recommendations
based on user location (e.g. shipping cost), and so on. In the case of
eCommerce IR these challenges require inherent understanding of
product attributes, user behavior, and the query context. Product
sites are characterized by the presence of a dynamic inventory
with a high rate of change and turnover, and a long tail of query
distribution.
Outside of search but still within Information Retrieval, the same
feature in different domains can have radically different meaning.
For example, in email filtering the presence of “Ray-Ban” along
with a price is a strong indication of spam, but within an auction
setting this likely indicates a valid product for sale. Another example
is natural language translation; company names, product names,
and even product descriptions do not translate well with existing
tools. Similar problems exist with knowledge graphs that are not
customised to match the product domain.
This workshop brings together researchers and practitioners to
identify a set of core research questions in eCommerce Information
Retrieval. This will include discussion of a research agenda which
will serve many purposes. First, collaboration: it will bring the
community together in a way that has never happened before.
Second, funds: it will help attract research funding to search in
this domain. Third, research: it will help attract researchers and
postgraduate students to eCommerce IR. Finally, it will help broaden
the definition of information retrieval at conferences such as SIGIR.
This workshop will also examine the problem of data availability.
As the purpose of a product site is to make data on entities available,
the same security concerns that plague other search domains may
not exist. However sales and seller information is private and proprietary and likely to be unavailable. We expect that the discussion
on data will result in both a proposal to release data that can be put

ABSTRACT
eCommerce Information Retrieval has received little attention in
the academic literature, yet it is an essential component of some
of the largest web sites (such as eBay, Amazon, Airbnb, Alibaba,
Taobao, Target, Facebook, and others). SIGIR has for several years
seen sponsorship from these kinds of organisations, who clearly
value the importance of research into Information Retrieval. This
workshop brings together researchers and practitioners of eCommerce IR to discuss topics unique to it, to set a research agenda, and
to examine how to build a dataset for research into this fascinating
topic.
eCommerce IR is ripe for research and has a unique set of problems. For example, in eCommerce search there may be no hypertext
links between documents (products); there is a click stream, but
more importantly, there is often a buy stream. eCommerce problems are wide in scope and range from user interaction modalities
(the kinds of search seen in when buying are different from those
of web-page search (i.e. it is not clear how shopping and buying
relate to the standard web-search interaction models)) through to
dynamic updates of a rapidly changing collection on auction sites,
and the experienceness of some products (such as Airbnb bookings).

CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems → Environment-specific retrieval;

KEYWORDS
eCommerce, Product Search, Recommendation
ACM Reference format:
Jon Degenhardt, Surya Kallumadi, Maarten de Rijke, Luo Si, Andrew Trotman, and Yinghui Xu. 2017. SIGIR 2017 Workshop on eCommerce (ECOM17).
In Proceedings of ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan, August 07-11 2017 (SIGIR’17),
2 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3077136.3084367

1

Maarten de Rijke

University of Amsterdam
The Netherlands

INTRODUCTION

Search, ranking, and recommendation have applications ranging
from traditional web search to document databases to vertical
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’17, August 07-11 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan
© 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5022-8/17/08.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3077136.3084367

1425

Workshop

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

to an eCommerce site, as well as some tasks that can be examined
on that data set.

2

•
•
•
•

THEMES AND PURPOSE

This workshop provides a venue for publication and discussion
of Information Retrieval research and ideas as they pertain to
eCommerce. It brings together practitioners and researchers from
academia and industry to discuss the challenges and approaches
to search and recommendation. A goal is to foster collaboration
and discussion in the broader IR community. We have an agenda to
raise awareness within the academic community of the problems
faced by this domain.

2.1

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Scope

3

The workshop relates to all aspects of eCommerce Information Retrieval. Research topics and challenges that are usually encountered
in this domain include:
• Machine learning techniques such as online learning and
deep learning for eCommerce applications
• Semantic representation for users, products and services &
Semantic understanding of queries
• Structured data and faceted search, converting unstructured
data to its structured form
• The use of domain specific facets in search and other IR tasks,
and how those facets are chosen
• Temporal dynamics for Search and Recommendation
• Models for relevance and ranking for multi-faceted entities
• Deterministic (and other) sorting of results lists (e.g. price
low to high including postage)
• Personalized search and recommendations
• Inventory display issues (for example: legal, ethical, and
spam)
• Cold start issues
• Personalization and the use of personal facets such as age,
gender, location etc.
• Indexing and search in a rapidly changing environment (for
example, an auction site)
• Scalability

Diversity in product search and recommendations
Strategies for resolving extremely low (or no) recall queries
Query intent
The use of external features such as reviews and ratings in
ranking
User interfaces and personalization
Reviews and sentiment analysis
The use of social signals in ranking and beyond
The balance between business requirements and user requirements (revenue vs relevance)
Trust
Live experimentation Desktop and mobile issues
Questions and answering, chatbots for eCommerce

WORKSHOP FORMAT

The workshop will start with an invited talks from well respected
practitioners (or academics) who are tackling eCommerce Information Retrieval problems.
A call asking not only for research papers, but also for position
and opinion papers and posters has been circulated. All submitted
papers and posters will be single-blind, peer reviewed by an international program committee of researchers of high repute. Accepted
papers will be presented with ample time for discussion. There will
be a poster session over lunch.
After the thought provoking invited talk and presentations the
participants will break-out into small groups to identify key areas
for future research in product search. Each group identifying one
key research problem, the challenges and opportunities, and report
back to the workshop on their findings.
The final session of the day will be a panel discussion. The topic
has not yet been set, but an obvious topic is data availability. Specifically, what guarantees need to be in place for an organisation like
to eBay make a dump available, and can we meet those guarantees?
The workshop schedule and activities are structured to contain
substantial time for discussion and engagement by all participants.

4

PARTICIPATION

This workshop is open to all interested parties.

1426

