Workshop

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

SIGIR 2017 Workshop on
Open Knowledge Base and Question Answering (OKBQA2017)
Key-Sun Choi

Teruko Mitamura

KAIST
kschoi@kaist.ac.kr

CMU
teruko@cs.cmu.edu

Jin-Dong Kim

Axel-Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo

Database Center for Life Science
jdkim@dbcls.rois.ac.jp

University of Paderborn
axel.ngonga@upb.de

data as a premier knowledge source is rapidly increasing. But we
are still far from having accurate natural language interfaces that
allow handling complex information needs in a user-centric and
highly performant manner. The development of such interfaces
requires the collaboration of a range of different fields, including
natural language processing, information extraction, knowledge
base construction and population, reasoning, and question answering.
The main goal of this workshop is to join forces in the collaborative development of open frameworks for knowledge extraction
and question answering, to share standards, and to foster the creation of an ecosystem of tools and benchmarks. The workshop will
therefore not only comprise short and long paper presentations but
also a hands-on session on already existing frameworks, standards,
and benchmarking campaigns, as well as a social meet-up.

ABSTRACT
Over the past years, several challenges and calls for research projects
have pointed out the dire need for pushing natural language interfaces. In this context, the importance of Semantic Web data
as a premier knowledge source is rapidly increasing. But we are
still far from having accurate natural language interfaces that allow handling complex information needs in a user-centric and
highly performant manner. The development of such interfaces
requires collaboration of a range of different fields, including natural language processing, information extraction, knowledge base
construction and population, reasoning, and question answering.
With the goal to join forces in the collaborative development of
natural language QA systems, the second OKBQA workshop is
organized within the 40th SIGIR conference.
ACM Reference format:
Key-Sun Choi, Teruko Mitamura, Piek Vossen, Jin-Dong Kim, and AxelCyrille Ngonga Ngomo. 2017. SIGIR 2017 Workshop on Open Knowledge
Base and Question Answering (OKBQA2017). In Proceedings of SIGIR ’17,
Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan, August 07-11, 2017, 2 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3077136.3084372

1

Piek Vossen

Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
p.vossen@let.vu.nl

2

THEME AND PURPOSE OF THE
WORKSHOP

Development of natural language QA systems requires expertise
in various technologies such as natural language processing, information extraction, knowledge base construction and population,
reasoning, and so on. The OKBQA community has been working
on establishing an open collaboration among interested parties in
developing natural language interfaces to knowledge bases. The
OKBQA hackathon has been held four times so far, and the OKBQA
platform (http://doc.okbqa.org) is developed as a main product.
The OKBQA workshop is a new series of forum for exchanging
frontier works relevant to natural language QA and knowledge
bases. The first OKBQA workshop was held in Osaka, Japan, within
COLING 2016 (International Conference on Computational Linguistics) (http://coling2016.okbqa.org/), and we met many participants
from NLP community. The second workshop is organized within
SIGIR 2017, for an intention to widen the community by soliciting
interested scholars and engineers from the general IR community.

INTRODUCTION

The huge and rapidly increasing amount of structured and unstructured data available on the Web makes it both possible and
necessary to support users in finding relevant information. The
trend moves more and more towards smart knowledge services
that are able to find information, aggregate them, draw inferences,
and present succinct answers without requiring the user to wade
through a large number of documents. The novel avenues made possible by knowledge services are numerous and diverse, including
ubiquitous information access (from smartphones, tablets, smart
watches, etc.), barrier-free access to data (especially for the blind
and disabled) and knowledge discovery.
Over the past years, several challenges and calls for research
projects have pointed out the dire need for pushing natural language interfaces. In this context, the importance of Semantic Web

2.1

Topics of interest

The topic of interest to be discussed during the workshop ranges
over natural language QA, KB construction and NLP annotation
framework for QA, as listed below:

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’17, August 07-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan
© 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5022-8/17/08.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3077136.3084372

• Natural Language Interface for Web of Data
– Browsing Linked Data
– Question Answering over Linked Data
– Benchmarking Natural Language Interfaces

1433

Workshop

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

– Term Matching and Entity Disambiguation
– SPARQL Query Pattern Generation
– Schema-agnostic Query Generation
– Discovery of Linked Data Sources
– Endpoint Profiling
– Dealing with Data and Schema Heterogeneity
– Providing Justifications of Answers and Conveying Trust
– Knowledge Base Design for Question Answering
– NLP resources for Question Answering
– Reasoning for Question Answering
– User Feedback and Interaction
– Dialogue Systems
– Personal Assistants
• Knowledge Base Construction for Question Answering
– Entity-centered Knowledge Bases
– Event-centered Knowledge Bases
– Human Intervention of Knowledge with QA
– NLP Annotations for Knowledge Extraction and Machine
Reading
– Gold Standard Data Sets and Quality Assessment
– Indexing and Mappings from Existing Sources (Structured,
Semi-structured or Unstructured)
• NLP Annotation Framework for Knowledge Base and Question Answering
– NLP annotation framework - to represent the layers and
their structure of language understanding in graph formats such as XML and RDF, including metadata and underlying ontologies
– NLP annotation knowledge base - to access existing annotated NLP resources efficiently and effectively for further
processing for knowledge base engineering and question
answering

3

WORKSHOP DESIGN

OKBQA’17 is a full day workshop. As well as oral presentations
and poster presentations of selected papers, the workshop program
will include a joint panel discussion with KG4IR workshop, held
in paralell at the SIGIR 2017. KG4IR group will bring the theme of
Knowledge Graphs and Semantics for Text Retrieval and Analysis,
whereas OKBQA group will bring the theme of Open Knowledge
Base and Question Answering. Dispite some similarities, these two
workshops have a different focus. It would be interesting to get
together to discuss different perspectives in the research areas.
With the paper presentations and the joint panel discussions,
we aim at providing a forum for exchange of not only ideas and
theories but also actual resources for engineering.

4

ORGANISATION

The organizing committee includes active members in the area of
NLP, QA, Semantic Web and KB construction, who are the authors
of this abstract. The program committee members support the
workshop by providing review for screening of submitted papers,
and includes the following members:
• André Freitas (University of Passau, Germany)
• Christina Unger (Universität Bielefeld, Germany)
• Eun-Kyung Kim (KAIST, Korea)
• Pum-mo Ryu (Busan University of Foreign Studies, Korea)
• Ricardo Usbeck (University of Leipzig, Germany)
• Jun Araki (Carnegie Mellon University, USA)
• Peter Clark (Allen Institute for AI, USA)
• Eduard Hovy (Carnegie Mellon University, USA)
• Madoka Ishioroshi (National Institute of Informatics, Japan)
• Hiroshi Kanayama (IBM Research - Tokyo, IBM Japan)
• Bernardo Magnini (Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Italy)
• Tatsunori Mori (Yokohama National University, Japan)
• Yuta Nakashima (Osaka University, Japan)
• Eric Nyberg (Carnegie Mellon University, USA)
• Anselmo Peñas (UNED, Spain)
• John M. Prager (IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, USA)
• Kotaro Sakamoto (Yokohama National University, Japan)
• Hideyuki Shibuki (Yokohama National University, Japan)
• Hideki Shima (Duolingo, Inc., USA)
• Koichi Takeda (IBM Research - Tokyo, IBM Japan)
• Chuan-Jie Lin (National Taiwan Ocean University, Taiwan)
• Di Wang (Carnegie Mellon University, USA)
• Luke Zettlemoyer (University of Washington, USA)

5

ENDORSEMENT

SIGIR (Special Interest Group on Information Retrieval) provided
their endorsement to the workshop due to the relevance of the
workshop to the IR community.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The OKBQA workshop is supported by the ExoBrain project (http:
//exobrain.kr/). We thank SIGIR for endorsement. We also thank
program committee members for their constructive review of submissions.

1434

