Session 2B: Filtering and Recommending 1

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Cross-Domain Recommendation via Clustering
on Multi-Layer Graphs
Aleksandr Farseev*, Ivan Samborskii** *, Andrey Filchenkov**, Tat-Seng Chua*
*National University of Singapore, **ITMO University
farseev@u.nus.edu,samborskiy.ivan@gmail.com,afilchenkov@niuitmo.ru,chuats@nus.edu.sg

ABSTRACT

In an attempt to make sense of the overwhelming amount of multisource data, various recommender systems were designed to extract
relevant information from individual users. However, most of them
utilize data from a single-source or of a single modality, while disregarding the potential of cross-source multi-modal recommendation.
Another aspect which lacks research, and is worth exploring, is the
role of personal and group knowledge integration in cross-source
multi-modal recommendation. It has been established in an earlier study that effective recommendation can be achieved based on
the combination of group and individual knowledge [7, 53]. While
individual knowledge is useful for the incorporation of personal
experience [48], group knowledge helps to improve the recommendation diversity [26].
Aiming to bridge these two research gaps, in this study, we focus
on the problem of recommendation across data sources (also
known as cross-domain recommendation) based on multi-view social media data. Specifically, this work is devoted to the emerging
topic of venue category recommendation [4, 18, 49], where we recommend a ranked list of Foursquare venue categories to users with
accounts in three social networks, namely Twitter, Instagram, and
Foursquare [19]. By performing filtering based on venue categories
of places around user’s current location, our recommender system
does not depend on any particular geographical area. This means
that it can be used for many real-world scenarios, such as tourist
route planning [32], facility arrangement [46], or interactive mobile assistance [20]. For example, based on one’s venue category
preferences, we could further recommend a particular venue (i.e.
Chinese Restaurant, Movie Theatre, etc.) near his/her current location, rather than a similar place located far away, even if the
venue located farther away may slightly better fit his/her preferences. Last but not least, the venue category recommendation (but
not venue recommendation) also helps to overcome evaluation
difficulty, which often arises due to location datasets’ sparsity.
Despite its potential, we recognize the challenges of integrating
cross-source venue category recommendation with individual and
group knowledge. One challenge is data integration. Multiple
data sources often describe distinct sides of users’ activities. For
example, Twitter may casually reveal users’ daily life updates, while
Instagram may uncover their visual preferences. At the same time,
social media content comes in many forms (modalities), such as text,
images or videos, which also exhibit different facets of users’ online
experiences. Such multi-source multi-modal data must be integrated
into one recommendation framework in a mutually-consistent fashion, which is an open research problem. Another challenge pertains
to group representation learning. Group representation can be
naturally expressed in the form of user communities, which must
be extracted from heterogeneous multi-source data. However, the
detection of such user communities from multi-source multi-modal

Venue category recommendation is an essential application for
the tourism and advertisement industries, wherein it may suggest attractive localities within close proximity to users’ current
location. Considering that many adults use more than three social networks simultaneously, it is reasonable to leverage on this
rapidly growing multi-source social media data to boost venue recommendation performance. Another approach to achieve higher
recommendation results is to utilize group knowledge, which is
able to diversify recommendation output. Taking into account these
two aspects, we introduce a novel cross-network collaborative recommendation framework C 3 R, which utilizes both individual and
group knowledge, while being trained on data from multiple social
media sources. Group knowledge is derived based on new crosssource user community detection approach, which utilizes both
inter-source relationship and the ability of sources to complement
each other. To fully utilize multi-source multi-view data, we process user-generated content by employing state-of-the-art text, image, and location processing techniques. Our experimental results
demonstrate the superiority of our multi-source framework over
state-of-the-art baselines and different data source combinations.
In addition, we suggest a new approach for automatic construction of inter-network relationship graph based on the data, which
eliminates the necessity of having pre-defined domain knowledge.
ACM Reference format:
Aleksandr Farseev*, Ivan Samborskii** *, Andrey Filchenkov**, Tat-Seng
Chua*. 2017. Cross-Domain Recommendation via Clustering on Multi-Layer
Graphs. In Proceedings of SIGIR ’17, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan, August 07-11,
2017, 10 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3077136.3080774

1

INTRODUCTION

There has been an exponential growth of publicly available data on
the Web. This growth may be linked to users using multiple online
social networks, such as that seen among many adult users, who
were found to use three or more online social networks daily [8].
These social networks are inter-connected through the deployment
of the so-called cross-linking functionality [10, 33], which offers
information about the same users from different perspectives [9].
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR ’17, August 07-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan
© 2017 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5022-8/17/08. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3077136.3080774

195

Session 2B: Filtering and Recommending 1

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

data is not an easy task due to the necessity of proper inter-source
and intra-source relationship modeling.
Inspired by previous studies and the challenges above, we seek to
address three research questions. First, to support the assumptions
behind this study, it is important to answer: (RQ1) Is it possible
to improve the recommendation performance by integrating individual and group knowledge? Second, even though the
topic has been discussed with respect to some problems, it is still unclear if: (RQ2) Inter-source relationship information enable
us to find better user communities. Finally, for further recommendation improvement, it is important to understand: (RQ3)
What the contribution is of each data source (modality) towards venue category recommendation.
To answer these research questions, we introduce a novel recommender framework C3 R that utilizes group and individual knowledge to perform Cross-Source User Community-Based Collaborative
venue category Recommendation. Individual knowledge is obtained
from user’s experience, which is modeled as the distribution among
venue categories that a user has visited in past. To incorporate
group knowledge, we detected cross-source user communities in a
latent space, where the relationship between users is modeled as a
multi-layer graph. The community detection approach incorporates
inter-source relationships during the process of learning individual source representations and preserves inter-source consistency
at the stage of learning latent sources’ representation. The intersource relationship graph is computed automatically from the data
and further utilized via novel graph-constrained regularization. The
experimental results show that our framework can achieve better
recommendation performance in three geographical regions, as
compared to state-of-the-art baselines and different data source
combinations.
The main contributions of this paper are threefold: First, we
present a cross-source venue recommendation framework that
utilizes both individual and group knowledge; second, we propose a
novel cross-source user community detection approach that
utilizes both inter-source relationship and sources’ ability to complement each other via efficient regularization; third, we suggest
a new approach for automatic construction of inter-source
relationship graph based on the data, which eliminates the necessity of having expert knowledge.

2

priors and modality priors for collaborative learning of a latent
representation. Recently, Farseev et al. [18] performed cross-source
venue category recommendation by implementing a recommender
system based on their proposed Multi-Source re-Ranking approach,
where the ranks of individual sources were obtained by performing
nearest neighbor collaborative filtering. These works are related to
our study regarding the cross-source approaches utilized. Finally,
Farseev et al. [17] and Wang et al. [52] proposed cross-domain recommender systems, where inter-domain linking was implemented
via the so-called “bridge” users (social media users who have accounts on two or more social networks). However, they do not
incorporate both group and individual knowledge into recommendation, which our study is recommending, and is an essential aspect
of our study.
At the same time, several works highlighted the potential of
multi-source data to find better user communities. For example, Su
et al. [45] demonstrated the usefulness of multi-source community
discovery for various applications; Rhouma and Romdhane [40] proposed an approach for multi-source user community detection in
partially-overlapping social network graphs; while Dong et al. [12]
introduced a multi-source clustering approach, where the distance
between different data sources was measured on Grassmann Manifolds. The works mentioned above are supportive of utilizing multisource community detection strategies; however, they are limited
because inter-source relationship was not incorporated during the
community discovery process. This could potentially lead to suboptimal results in real world settings.
There were also research efforts in studying the contribution
of multiple data sources for different applications. For example,
Farseev et al. [15, 16] proposed a multi-source multi-task learning
frameworks that aim to combine multi-source multimodal data and
data from wearable sensors for Body Mass Index inference; while
Song et al. [44] and Akbari et al. [3] developed multi-task learning
frameworks for user interests inference and wellness events categorization, respectively. In these four studies, the inference category
relationship “weights” were automatically inferred from the data
and used to guide the learning model, which can also be applied to
solve our problem.

3

CROSS-SOURCE RECOMMENDATION

Strategic decision making is known to be influenced by external
factors like personal experiences and public opinions [5]. The public
opinion can be expressed by explicit and implicit user communities
that are formed based on social relations and their data similarity,
respectively. This phenomenon can be leveraged to enhance recommendation performance. To do so, we perform venue category
recommendation based on both personal and group knowledge,
which naturally models the impact of society on an individual’s
behavior during the selection of a new place to go. Formally, our
proposed C 3 R recommendation approach is defined as follows:

RELATED WORKS

Probably one of the first studies towards improving recommendation performance based on multi-source data was conducted by
Abel et al. [1]. The authors aggregated user profiles from Flickr,
Twitter, and Delicious to demonstrate that their cross-network user
modeling strategies have a large impact on the recommendation
quality in cold-start settings. At the same time, Tiroshi et al. [47]
utilized network-related and domain-related features to perform
user interest recommendation. Later on, Yan et al. [56] proposed a
two-stage solution of cross-source video recommendation problem:
first, user preferences were transferred from an auxiliary network
by learning cross-network behavior correlations; next, the transferred preferences were integrated with the observed behaviors
on target network in an adaptive fashion. Concurrently, Qian et
al. [37] introduced a probabilistic framework that solved the problem of cross-domain recommendation by utilizing shared domain

Í


v ∈Cu vecv
rec(u) = sort γ · vecu + θ
|Cu |

(1)

where vecu is the distribution
Í of the user u among items (venue
v ∈Cu vecv
categories) in u’s past, and
is the normalized (by the
|Cu |

196

Session 2B: Filtering and Recommending 1

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Table 1: Notations summary

number of members in user community Cu ) distribution of all community members among venue categories in Cu ’s past, γ controls
the personal aspect of recommendation, while θ regulates the group
experience impact of the user community Cu . Besides the benefits
described earlier, incorporation of user communities reduces the
search space during the recommendation process and provides better candidates to compare for further collaborative filtering [42].
While personal information (i.e. users’ previous activity) is often
available, in most of the cases user communities are not explicitly
indicated, which gives rise to user community detection challenge.

Symb.
vecu
Cu
γ
θ
N
M
Li
Ui
Lˆi

4 USER COMMUNITY DETECTION
4.1 Similarity Graph Construction
The first step in finding representative user groups is the modeling
of users’ relationships in the form of a graph so that dense subgraphs of such graph can be treated as user communities. The graph
can be constructed based on: (a) social connections between users
(i.e. follower/followee relationship) that are often hidden behind
the privacy settings; or (b) user-generated content (UGC), where
similarity between users is estimated as a distance between data
representations of users and each data source (modality) modeled
as a layer in a multi-layer graph. In our work, we adopt the graph
construction based on UGC to avoid privacy concerns and limitations in mining explicit user social relations. Specifically, for every
graph node pair (i, j) from the m-th graph layer, the corresponding
distance can be computed by applying Heat kernel:
dmi, j = e −

||xmi −xm j || 2
σ

Uˆi
L̂mod
WR
k
α
βi

However, the NCut problem is proven to be N P-hard [51]. Fortunately, there exists a state-of-the-art approximation that is defined
as a standard trace minimization (also known as spectral clustering) [50]:

,

min tr(U ⊺ L sym U ), s .t . U ⊺ U = I .

U ∈R n×k

where ||xmi −xm j || is the Euclidean norm, and σ is a graph sparsityrelated parameter that could be found by grid search. There are
certain benefits of such graph construction approach [14]. Firstly,
it does not suffer from the lack of information about users’ relationship, since the relations between users are simply modeled as
distances between users based on UGC similarity. Secondly, it naturally solves the problem of cross-region recommendation, where
the condition for related users to be explicitly connected in social
networks is relaxed.

4.2

4.3

N Cut (C 1, ..., C k ) =

i =1

vol (C i )

=

i =1

vol (C i )

Spectral clustering on multi-layer graph

The well-known disadvantages of early fusion and late fusion data
aggregation strategies [3] encourage us to perform joint clustering
from all graph layers simultaneously. The final data representation
(latent representation) must be consistent with all graph layers so
that clustering will not be biased towards individual graph layers.
One way to keep the latent representation consistent to all layers
of the multi-layer graph is to apply regularization during the clustering process, which will keep graph layers “close” to the target
representation. A well-adopted approach for measuring “closeness"
between target latent space U and the space of each layer Ui is based
on Grassman Manifolds [25], where the projected distance between
two spaces S 1 and S 2 on Grassman Manifold is equal to [12]:

To simplify the reading process, we summarize all defined notations
in Table 1.
One of the commonly used formulations of the community detection problem is its representation in a form of NCut formulation,
which conditions the sum of graph edges’ weights in each community to be minimized among all communities [43]. This simply
means that all communities are formed by users that are most “similar” to each other. Such a definition is naturally applicable to our
task of group representation learning based on users’ interests. We
thus adopt the NCut formulation in our study. The NCut definition
is given below:
k
Õ
cut (C i , C i )

(2)

By the Rayleigh-Ritz theorem, the solution of the problem in
Equation (2) is given by the first k eigenvectors of the normalized
1
1
graph Laplacian Lsym = I − D − 2 W D − 2 , where W is adjacency
matrix, and D is degree matrix [30]. The mapping of each user to a
cluster can be further obtained by i.e. k-means clustering over the
eigenvector space [50].

Problem Formulation

k
Õ
W (C i , C i )

Description
Distribution of the user u among items (venue categories) in u’s past
Community of the user u
Parameter that controls personal aspect of rec-n
Parameter that controls group aspect of rec-n
Number of users
Number of data sources (graph layers)
Laplacian matrix of the i-th layer
Eigendecomposition matrix of the i-th layer
Inter-layer relationship regularized Laplacian of the
i-th layer
Inter-layer relationship regularized eigendecomposition matrix of the i-th layer
Sub-space regularized Laplacian matrix
Adjacency matrix of inter-layer similarity graph
Parameter that controls the number of clusters
Parameter that controls sub-space regularization
Parameter that controls inter-layer regularization for
the layer i

d P2 r o j (S 1, S 2 ) =
,

1
⊺
⊺
| |S 1 S 1 − S 2 S 2 | |F2 ,
2

(3)

where ||A||F is the Frobenius norm [22] of the matrix A.
⊺
⊺
Since mappings S 1S 1 and S 2S 2 preserve distinctness [12], we
consider the projection distance as a distance measure between
subspaces. The distance between target subspace S and all the other
M can thus be defined as the sum of
individual subspaces {Si }i=1

where vol(Ci ) is the sum of weights of all edges attached to vertices
in Ci .

197

Session 2B: Filtering and Recommending 1

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

squared projection distances between S and all individual subspaces
M [12]:
{Si }i=1
d P2 r o j (S, {S i }iM=1 ) = k M −

M
Õ
i =1

⊺

tr(SS ⊺ S i S i ).

using previously defined distance on Grassman manifold, we define
the new objective function for the i-th layer as follows:

(4)

Ûi ∈Rn×k

By utilizing the Equation (4), the Equation (2) can be extended
to introduce the subspace-regularized objective:
min

M
Õ

U ∈Rn×k i =1

tr(U ⊺ L i U ) + α (k M −

M
Õ
i =1

(5)

where α controls sub-space regularization. We can rearrange Equation (4) to present it in a form of standard trace minimization problem [12]:
min

U ∈Rn×k i =1

=

tr(U ⊺ L i U ) + α (k M −

min tr(U ⊺

U ∈Rn×k

M
Õ
i =1

Ûi ∈Rn×k

=
(6)

⊺
Ûi Ûi

(7)

= I,

M
Õ

⊺

tr(Ûi L i Ûi ) + β i (k M −

min

Ûi ∈Rn×k

M
Õ

⊺

tr(Ûi (L i − β i

⊺

j=1, j,i

w i, j tr(Ûi Ûi U j U j ⊺ ))

w i, j U j U j ⊺ )Ûi ),

j =1, j ,i

thus, by the Rayleigh-Ritz theorem, it can be solved as the first k
eigenvectors of the regularized Laplacian L̂ :

i =1

which, by the Rayleigh-Ritz theorem [30], can be solved as the
ÍM
first k eigenvectors of the modified Laplacian Lmod = i=1
(Li −
⊺
αUi Ui ). The eigen decomposition of the matrix Lmod is not in the
scope of the paper, but can be efficiently computed by well-known
algorithms [28].

4.4

w i, j tr(Ûi Ûi U j U j ⊺ )),
s .t .

min

⊺
tr(U U ⊺ Ui Ui ))

M
Õ
⊺
(L i − αUi Ui )U ),

⊺

j =1, j,i

⊺

s .t . U ⊺ U = I,

M
Õ

tr(Ûi L i Ûi ) + β i (k M −

where Ûi is the new spectral space of the i-th layer, βi — parameter
M —
that controls inter-layer regularization for the layer i, {U j }j=1
spectral spaces of all layers after standard spectral clustering, w i, j —
similarity between layer i and layer j. The problem in Equation (7)
can be then presented as a standard trace minimization:

⊺

tr(U U ⊺ Ui Ui )),

M
Õ

⊺

min

M
Õ

L̂ i := L i − β i

w i, j U j U j ⊺ .

j=1, j,i

We now presented all necessary components to define our multilayer clustering approach with the following objective function:

Incorporating inter-layer relationship
min

M
Õ

U ∈Rn×k i =1

Even though the subspace-regularized spectral clustering approach
performed well on synthetic dataset [12], real world problems often require a consideration of inter-layer relationship (similarity)
during the learning process. Such a requirement is caused by the
difference between data modalities and the way they describe the
users [18]. Specifically, for particular applications some data sources
or modalities may be more informative than others. For example,
Foursquare check-ins could be more useful for venue category recommendation than textual posts, while Twitter text data is of crucial
importance for demographic profiling [19].
Inspired by previous works [6, 18, 54] and based on our observations, we take a step further in multi-layer clustering by introducing
a novel model regularization schema that guides clustering process
based on predefined inter-layer relationship graph. Given the multilayer user relationship graph G, which is constructed as described
in previous sections, let’s assume that there exists a complete undirected inter-layer similarity graph R with the adjacency matrix WR ,
where each value of the matrix w i, j represent the similarity between
i-th and j-th layer of G. While WR can be automatically computed
from the data (see next section for details), we first describe our
inter-layer regularized spectral clustering approach.
Essentially, our goal is to regularize the conventional spectral
clustering in such a way that the representation of each layer Ûi
would be computed with respect to the inter-layer similarities w i, j ,
which are taken from adjacency matrix of the inter-layer relationship graph R. Let’s also note that the approach in Equation (6) reM and their spectral
lies on pre-computed layers’ Laplacians {Li }i=1
M
spaces {Ui }i=1 . In our work, we apply the inter-layer regularization
on the process of computing the layers’ spectral spaces, so that the
final multi-layer spectral space is computed as in Equation (6). By

tr(U ⊺ L̂ i U ) + α (k M −
=

min tr(U ⊺

U ∈Rn×k

M
Õ

i =1
M
Õ
i =1

⊺

tr(U U ⊺ Ûi Ûi ))
⊺

(8)

(L̂ i − α Ûi Ûi )U ),
s .t . U ⊺ U = I .

To make the clustering procedure clear, we present the pseudocode as shown in Algorithm 1.
From the pseudocode, it can be seen that optimization of the
Equation (8) and further clustering consists of four main steps: 1)
Perform conventional spectral clustering on each layer to obtain
Li and Ui ; 2) By incorporating inter-layer relationship graph R,
perform inter-layer relationship regularized spectral clustering on
each layer to obtain L̂i and Ûi ; 3) Execute subspace-regularized
spectral clustering on each layer to obtain L̂mod and U ; 4) Normalize
U to obtain Unorm and execute the x-means clustering over it [35].
The value of the subspace regularization parameter α and the
inter-layer regularization parameters βi can be found by grid search.
In next section, we outline the construction of inter-layer similarity
graph G.

4.5

Computing Inter-Layer Relationship

Intuitively, the inter-layer relationship graph R must represent the
similarity between layers in terms of clustering results, summarized
for different values of k. We thus define the similarity sim(w, q)
between graph layers q and w as a normalized difference between
N × N k-clustering co-occurrence matrices Mq,k , Mw,k , in which
each value mi, j is equal to 1 if user i is assigned to the same cluster
as user j in both layers w and q, and 0 otherwise. The clustering
co-occurrence matrices are obtained by performing single-layer
spectral clustering on each layer of the multi-layer graph and for

198

Session 2B: Filtering and Recommending 1

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

time, while the complexity of x-means clustering in space Unorm is
O(N 2k 2 ) [35]. The total C 3 R time complexity, thus, is O(M 2 N 2k) +
O(MN 3 ) + O(N 2k 2 ) = O(N 2 (M 2k + MN + k 2 )), where M, k ≪ N .

Algorithm 1 C 3 R clustering
1:

2:
3:

4:

5:

6:
7:

8:

9:
10:

11:

12:

M , W , k, α,
cluster({Wi }i=1
R

M )
{βi }i=1

function
M are weighted adjacency matrices of layers {G } M ,
▷ {Wi }i=1
i i=1
WR is adjacency matrix of inter-layer similarity graph,
k is target number of clusters,
M are regularization parameters
α and {βi }i=1

5 EVALUATION
5.1 On Community Detection Evaluation
There are two main approaches for evaluating community detection algorithms: direct evaluation and indirect evaluation. Direct
evaluation uses a quality measure (e.g. Modularity) to compare community detection results achieved by different algorithms explicitly.
However, there is no any widely accepted measure to quantify community detection results in the case of multi-source community
discovery. Moreover, many of such quality estimation measures
were found to be weakly related to the actual quality of the detected communities [21]. Indirect evaluation, in turn, compares
results achieved by approaches from other application domains (e.g.
Recommendation, Classification, etc.). Such approaches must be
created based on earlier obtained communities. The latter conforms
well with our study and allows for evaluating both our proposed
cross-source recommendation approach and its backbone — multilayer community detection approach. In this work, we thus perform
the indirect evaluation.

for i ← [0; M − 1] do
Compute Li and Ui for G i [50]
▷ Li is the normalized Laplacian matrix of the layer i,
Ui is subspace representation of the layer i,
G i is ith layer graph
Í
⊺
Compute L̂i ← Li − βi M
j=1, j,i w i, j U j U j
▷ L̂i is the regularized Laplacian matrix of ith layer
Compute Ûi ∈ RN ×k
▷ Ûi is the the matrix of first k eigenvectors of L̂i [28]
end for
ÍM
⊺
Compute L̂mod ← i=1
(L̂i − α Ûi Uˆi )
▷ L̂mod is the modified Laplacian matrix [12]
Compute U ∈ RN ×k
▷ U is the matrix of first k eigenvectors [28] of L̂mod
Normalize rows of U to get Unorm
k ← finalClustering(U
{C}i=1
norm )
▷ finalClustering() is k-means or x-means clustering

5.2

k
return {C}i=1
▷ C 1 , ..., Ck are cluster assignment
end function

√
different values of k (k = 2..K, where K = N [23]). We then take
an average among relation values obtained for different k:
sim(w, q) =

K
Õ
k =2

| |Mw,k − Mq,k | |
1−
p
N (N − 1)

!!
/ (K − 1).

The above formulation is the modified and normalized version
of the Partition Difference measurement [29]. Being averaged over
different values of k, it is able to serve as a reliable indicator of the
similarity between different social networks in terms of clustering
results. We explicitly would like to mention that our-proposed interlayer relationship graph construction approach is purely automated
and does not require any expert knowledge. This suggests its further
usage for other graph-constraint unsupervised learning approaches.

4.6

Dataset

To answer our research questions, we evaluate the C 3 R recommendation framework based on largest available multi-source multimodal cross-region social dataset NUS-MSS [19]. The dataset is
provided for three social networks (Twitter, Foursquare, and Instagram), and was collected during the period of 10 July 2014 – 20 Dec
2014 in Singapore, London, and New York [19]. Farseev et al. [19]
first collected a set of active users, who have recently posted tweets
through the cross-linking functionality of Instagram or Swarm mobile apps. Further, authors utilized Twitter REST API to perform
the location-dependent tweets search in three geographical regions.
Based on the active user list, Farseev et al. [19] crawled user generated contents for those users, who posted their activities from
other social networks on Twitter. For example, each sampled Twitter cross-linking post (e.g. Foursquare check-in) contains a short
link to the original check-in page, where the check-in details are
available [15].
For every geographical region the following five feature types
are provided:
Textual features (3 feature types combined in one vector): 70
LIWC distribution features [36], distribution over 50 LDA topics,
and 14 writing style features [19] from Twitter posts, Instagram
image captions, and Foursquare “shouts”.
Location (Venue Category) Features: distribution over 764 venue
categories.
Visual features: distribution over 1000 ImageNet [11] concepts,
extracted from Instagram images.
Based on the data collection time frame, Farseev et al. [19]
split NUS-MSS dataset into fixed training and test sets. In other
words, check-ins posted by the same users but in different
time intervals were used to form training and testing sets.
The training set consists of the first 3 months of data, while the
testing set consists of the last 2 months. Only users who contributed
content to all three social networks during both train and test set

Computational time complexity analysis

To analyze the complexity of C 3 R clustering, we need to estimate
the complexity of each step of Algorithm 1. If N is the number of
users, M the number of graph layers (data modalities), and k is the
number of first eigenvectors to compute, C 3 R time complexity can
be estimated as O(N 2 (M 2k + MN + k 2 )). Below, we discuss the
complexity in more details.
First, each Laplacian (Li ) and eigenvector matrix (Ui ) computational complexity is O(N 3 ), which sums up to O(MN 3 ) for computing them for all graph layers. The computation of each Lˆi costs
O(MN 2k), which gives the computational complexity of O(M 2 N 2k).
The total cost of Uˆi computation is O(MN 3 ). L̂mod can be computed in O(MN 2k) time. The computation of matrix U takes O(N 3 )

199

Session 2B: Filtering and Recommending 1

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

time frames were included in the evaluation process1 . This gives
rise to 1801 users from Singapore, 813 users from London, and 1602
users from New York. The number of recommendation items (venue
categories) in all three geographical regions equals to 764.

Median distance between AOIs. This feature reflects users’ mobility at intra-city/inter-city/international level. Specifically, it shows
how often and how far users travel between their activity zones
and can be useful to infer travel-related user communities.

5.3

5.4

Additionally-Extracted Features

In addition to the features provided by NUS-MSS dataset, we extracted a 48-dimensional temporal feature and 4 mobility features.
It is known that online activity of social-media users is tightly knit
to temporal and mobility aspects [34], which makes it reasonable
to incorporate such data into community detection process. Intuitively, users with similar mobility patterns (i.e. often co-located)
and similar temporal patterns (i.e. often perform activities at similar
time intervals) may have similar interests and can form an interestsbased community. Below, we give a brief description of the mobility
and temporal data features that we used to form mobility and temporal layers of user relationship graph.
The mobility features were computed based on users’ areas of
interest (AOIs) [38], which are geographical regions of user’s high
geo-location density (regardless the geo-location semantic meaning, which could be a geo-located tweet, geo-located Instagram
image, or Foursquare check-in). AOIs were obtained by performing
density-based clustering2 [41] over the geo locations of each user
and considering the convex hull of each cluster as a new AOI. ε
was computed by analyzing the average distance between neighbors in MinPts-distance graph (MinPts = 3 was selected empirically) [13]. User’s AOIs represent his/her geographical mobility
patterns [34, 38] that can be related to user’s lifestyle and interests.
We extracted the following Mobility And Temporal features:
Average number of posts during each of the 8 daytime durations, where each time duration is 3 hours long. The temporal
features were computed for each data source with respect to weekday/weekend factor. In total, there were 8 × 3 × 2 = 48 temporal
data dimensions computed. The temporal features indicate users’
temporal online activity and related to their urban mobility [34].
Number of areas of interest (AOI). This feature reflects the mobility side of user’s physical activity. For example, users with the
higher number of AOIs may have a physically intense lifestyle. AOIs
also represent users’ frequent areas of activity (i.e. home, office,
university/school) [38] and may indicate how far users are willing
to travel on a daily basis.
Median size of user’s AOIs3 , which indicates users’ mobility inside each AOI. The feature is an indicator of users’ traveling habits
inside their main activity areas.
Normalized number of AOI outliers. The feature indicates how
often users visit places that are not located inside their AOI, which
may show how often users deviate from their regular mobility
patterns.

Evaluation Measures

To evaluate our framework against competing systems, we chose
the following two widely accepted measures:
Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain (N DCG) measure,
which is defined as:
p

N DCG@p =

Õ 2r eli
DCG@p
Cat i
, DCG@p =
, r el i =
,
I DCG@p
log
(i
+
1)
N
C at
2
i =1

where IDCG is the maximum possible (Ideal) DCG for a given set
of queries, reli is the graded relevance of the result at position i,
Cati is number of times user checked-in at venue of category i, and
NCat = 764 is the total number of Foursquare venue categories in
the dataset.
Average Precision (AP), which is defined as:
AP @p = Íp

1

p
Õ

i =1 r i i =1

Íi
ri

j=1 r j

i

!

(
, ri =

1,
0,

i is in top p visited cat.)
otherwise.

In this section, we briefly describe competing recommendation
approaches, and different C 3 R modifications.
5.4.1 Recommender System Baselines.
Popular (POP) — performs recommendation only based on user’s
past experience (distribution on user’s check-ins among 764 Location (Venue Category) features in past). To note, it is the special
case of C 3 R recommendation (Equation (1)), where θ = 0.
PopularAll (POPAll ) — performs recommendation based on aggregated experience of all users, which produces user-independent
recommendation output (764 Venue Category features were utilized).
Multi-Source Re-Ranking (MSRR) [18] — linearly combines
recommendation results from all data modalities and determines
source weights via Stochastic Hill Climbing With Random Restart
(SHCR) (See Farseev et al. [19] for details): w tw = 0.42, w f sq =
0.95, w isnt = 0.36, w t emp = 0.65, wmob = 0.02.
Nearest Neighbor Collaborative Filtering (CF) [2] — produces
recommendation based on top k = 20 (determined by SHCR) most
similar users from the recommendation source (Foursquare, in our
case) using a similarity measure (in our case, Heat distance) over
764 Venue Category features.
Early Fusion (EF) [55] — fuses multi-source data into a single
feature vector (of dimension 1952) and performs recommendation
via CF.
Implicit Feedback-Enhanced Singular Value Decomposition
(SVD++) [27] — makes use of the “implicit feedback” information
in factorization model (trained on 764 Venue Category features),
where λ = 0.67, γ = 0.06, k = 277, iter = 55 are obtained by
SHCR [19].
Factorization Machines (FM) [39] — brings together the advantages of different factorization-based models via regularization. In
our study, we trained FM based on 764 Venue Category features,
utilized the MCMC optimization technique [39] and the regression
loss, where k = 30, iter = 140 are obtained by SHCR [19].

1 The

requirement of conducting evaluation based on users with data from all three
social networks is dictated by the necessity to make a fair comparison of clustering
performance on different data source combinations. Such comparison is only possible
in case when the results were obtained based on fixed training and testing sets that
consist of the same users.
2 Most of NUS-MSS’s check-ins belong to three geographical regions (Singapore, New
York, London), which makes it possible to compute DBScan clusters for most of the
NUS-MSS users
3 Where AOI size is defined as the median distance between the center of mass and all
points inside AOI.

200

Session 2B: Filtering and Recommending 1

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

baselines in terms of both AP and N DCG evaluation metrics. This
confidently confirms the necessity of individual and group knowledge integration and positively answers RQ1.
Let us also highlight the weak performance of the factorizationbased models. For example, even after proper negative sampling [24],
FM is not able to perform relevant recommendation in the head
of the recommendation list, which explains its poor performance
in terms of N DCG measure. At the same time, SVD++ fails to outperform others in terms of Precision, which could be explained by
the limited applicability of the “implicit feedback” concept to the
task of venue category recommendation. Specifically, the fact that
some users did not visit a venue of a particular category does not
necessarily mean that they do not appreciate such venue type. Alternatively, such behavior could be a result of the geographical [34]
or social [31] constraints. Another interesting observation is the
advance of popularity-based baseline (POP) over other recommendation approaches in New York region (regarding AP). The possible
explanation is that Foursquare users often re-visit venues of the
same category, which means that their corresponding training and
test sets significantly overlap in many cases (regarding item distributions). The last is not typical for recommendation systems and
may lead to the sub-optimal performance.

5.4.2 C3 R And Its Modifications.
In four C3 R modifications below, recommendation was performed
according to Equation 1, and community detection was performed
over all 1952 features.
C3 R — our proposed C 3 R recommendation approach (Equation 1),
where user communities are detected as minimization of Equation (8) via the Algorithm 1. The estimated parameters are: k =
10, α = 0.922, βi = 1 (i = 1..M), γ = 1, θ = 0.248, which are
inferred by SHCR. The adjacency matrix WR of the automatically
constructed (See Section 4.5) inter-layer similarity graph is given
below:
txt
loc
vis
tmp mob
©
ª
1
0.632 0.621 0.643 0.561 ®
­ txt
­
®
1
0.614 0.631 0.570 ®
­ loc 0.632
WR = ­
®
1
0.621 0.551 ®
­ vis 0.621 0.614
­
®
­ tmp 0.643 0.631 0.621
1
0.560 ®
1 ¬
« mob 0.561 0.570 0.551 0.560

C3 R−L̂ — C 3 R recommendation without inter-layer regularization
(βi = 0, i = 1..M), where k = 10, α = 0.521, γ = 1, θ = 0.1 are
obtained by SHCR [19].
C3 R−L̂−L
— C 3 R recommendation without inter-layer regularmod
ization (βi = 0, i = 1..M) and sub-space regularization (α = 0),
where k = 22, γ = 1, θ = 0.147 are obtained by SHCR [19].
C3 R−Comm — C 3 R recommendation without user community extraction (all users are considered to be in the same community).
C3 R (DBScan) — C 3 R recommendation, where user communities
are detected by Density-Based clustering (DBScan) [41]. The DBScan’s ε = 0.9 and MinPts = 6 were obtained by grid search.
C3 R (x-means) — C 3 R recommendation, where user communities
are detected by x-means clustering [35]
C3 R (Hierarchical) — C 3 R recommendation, where user communities are detected by Hierarchical Clustering. Parameter k = 10
and “single linkage” inter-cluster distance measure were obtained
by grid search.

5.5

5.6

Comparing C3 R Modifications

To answer RQ25 , we compare different C 3 R modifications, which
include different variants of our proposed community detection
approach as well as other state-of-the-art clustering approaches.
The evaluation results are presented in Figure 2.
First, we note that the non-regularized version of the framework
(C 3 R −L̂−L
) performs the worst against its relatives and other
mod
clustering algorithms. This is due to the inability of such nonregularized clustering to build a consistent latent representation,
which does not consider inter-network relationship and leads to
poor recommendation performance. At the same time, the interlayer regularized C 3 R framework beat all the baselines in all three
cities, which could not be achieved by its non-regularized versions
(C 3 R −L̂−L
, C 3 R −L̂ , C 3 R −Comm ). The above observation suggests
mod
the importance of subspace regularization in combination with
inter-source regularization for balanced user-community detection
and, as a result, better recommendation performance. It also allows
us to give a positive response to RQ2.
Let us also outline the good performance of other clustering
approaches, where the recommendation based on x-means clustering (C 3 R (x-means)) performs slightly better than other clustering
baselines. The above is consistent with the previous study [17] and
can be explained by algorithm’s ability to automatically infer the
parameter k (number of clusters), which allows for finding more
distinctive (regarding Bayesian Information Criterion) user communities and, eventually, provide more relevant recommendation.

Comparing With Baselines

To answer RQ14 , we evaluate C 3 R framework against other recommender systems. The evaluation results are presented in Figure 1.
First, an interesting observation is the poor performance of the
EF approach, regarding both AP and N DCG evaluation metrics,
which, once again [18], suggests the necessity of using proper data
fusion approaches for multi-source learning. On the other hand,
the recommendation approach based on user’s past items distribution (POP) produces comparably good recommendation output,
especially for the small values of p. It means that Foursquare users
tend to re-visit venue categories that they have already visited in
past, which highlights the importance of individual knowledge for
venue category recommendation and allows POP for achieving
high recommendation performance. At the same time, the POPAll
baseline (non-personalized popularity-based recommendation) outperforms FM and EF approaches concerning N DCG metric, which
suggests the usefulness of group knowledge for recommendation
purposes. Finally, it can be seen that the combination of individual and group knowledge in C 3 R significantly outperforms other

5.7

Comparing Data Source Combinations

To gain insight into the role of different data sources (modalities)
for venue category recommendation and answer RQ36 , we evaluate our framework trained on all data modalities against different
5 Does inter-source relationship information enable us to find better user communities?

4 Is

6 What

it possible to improve the recommendation performance by integrating individual
and group knowledge?

the contribution is of each data source (modality) towards venue category
recommendation?

201

Session 2B: Filtering and Recommending 1

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

N DCG@p

0.7

0.7

0.7

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3
0

20

40

60

80

100

0.3
0

20

40

p

AP @p

80

100

0

0.45

0.45

0.45

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.35

0.35

0.35

0.3
40

60

80

100

20

40

60

80

100

0

Figure 1: Evaluation

POPAl l

CF

EF

SVD++

0.7

0.65

0.65

0.65

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.55

0.55

0.55

0.5

0.5
80

100

20

40

60

80

100

C 3 R −L̂−L

C 3 R −L̂

mod

London

of C 3 R

C 3 R (DBScan)

15

20

60

80

100

C 3 R (Hierarchical)

framework (different clustering algorithms)
Singapore

0.57
0.568
0.566
0.564
0.562
0.56
0.558
0.556
0.554
10

40

New York

0.564
0.562
0.56
0.558
0.556
0.554
0.552
0.55
0.548
5

20

p

C 3 R (x-means)

Figure 2: Recommendation performance of different modifications

0

0

p

C 3 R −Comm

100

0.5
0

p
C3R

80

Singapore

New York

60

60

framework against other recommendation approaches (N DCG@p, AP@p)

0.7

40

40

C3R

FM

0.7

20

100

p

MSRR

London

0

20

p

of C 3 R

80

0.3
0

p
POP

60

Singapore
0.5

20

40

New York
0.5

0

20

p

0.5

0.3

N DCG@p

60

p

London

N DCG@p

Singapore

New York

London

0.68
0.675
0.67
0.665
0.66
0.655
0

5

10

p
Text
Text + Location (Venue Catategory)
Text + Location (Venue Catategory) + Visual

15

p
Location (Venue Catategory)
Text + Visual

20

0

5

10

15

p
Visual
Location (Venue Catategory) + Visual

Figure 3: Recommendation performance of C 3 R framework based on different data source combinations

202

20

Session 2B: Filtering and Recommending 1

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Table 2: User communities profiles

data modality combinations. Due to space constraints, in Figure 3
we do not present all feature combinations (31 different combinations), but only show the combinations that include Temporal and
Mobility features. For example, the combination “Text” includes
Textual, Temporal, and Mobility features, while the combination
“Text + Location (Venue Category)” includes Text, Location (Venue
Category), Temporal, and Mobility features.
It is not surprising that the recommendation purely based on
venue category distribution performs the best among all singlemodal baselines in all three cities [18]. The reason is that the venue
category data from Foursquare contains explicit knowledge about
the distribution of recommendation items in the training set, and
thus can forecast the distribution of items in the test set accurately. Bi-source combination results also provide for interesting
observations. For example, the Location (Venue Category) + Text
combination achieves the best recommendation performance in
London and New York regions, but not in Singapore (where text
from Twitter gives way to Instagram images). The possible reason
is the differences in daily social media usage patterns in different
geographical regions: London and New York users mainly post
interest-related messages on Twitter, while Singapore users (where
Twitter is not widely used) upload pictures of their interests on
Instagram (i.e. pictures of food [31]). The above is also supported
by the previous study [19], where image data plays a crucial role
for the task of multi-source demographic profiling in Singapore.
Lastly, we also notice that the combination of all data sources performs the best for all three geographical regions, where the maximum recommendation performance is achieved in Singapore. This
could be possibly because of the fact that Singapore has the largest
amount of available multi-source data, in comparison with New
York and London [19]. Summarizing the above, we answer the
RQ3 by highlighting the importance of venue category, temporal and location-based data as a major contributors towards
recommendation performance. At the same time, depending on
geographical region and users’ posting behavior, visual data and
textual data may impact differently, while the combination
of all data sources allows for achieving the best recommendation performance in most of the cases.

5.8

Community
(Com1)
“Gadgets”
832 users
(Com2)
“Arts”
538 users
(Com3)
“Food”
446 users

Bag of Words for different modalities
Text
Visual
Location
device,
mouse, digital electronics
launcher,
clock,
hard store,
tech.
android
disc
building
painting,
obelisk, paint- arts & crafts
landscape, brush, pencil store, arts &
reflection
box
museum
dining,
pineapple, mi- italian restaucoffee,
crowave, fry- rant, pizzeria,
cooking
ing pan
restaurant

collaborative filtering based on those social media users, who are semantically “close” to the user of the recommendation system, which
helps to boost the recommendation performance. The inter-modal
consistency of the community profiles shows that C 3 R can perform
balanced clustering on a multi-layer graph, which is achieved via
inter-layer regularization. The overall results suggest the applicability of the proposed techniques for a task of multi-source user
community detection and encourage further research along these
directions.

6

LIMITATIONS

Although C 3 R outperforms the baselines, there are several limitations that we would like to highlight. First, our proposed multisource clustering approach requires simultaneous availability of
data from all three social networks. This does not allow for its
usage in a cold-start settings. Such problem could be addressed by
introducing multi-source data completion prior to clustering process, or by performing late model fusion [18]. Another limitation is
the time complexity of the framework, which is introduced by the
graph Laplacians computation. The issue could be potentially resolved via reformulating the spectral clustering problem in a smaller
space [10]. Particularly, by replacing N × N graph Laplacians with
P × P matrices (P ≪ N ), a solution of mathematically-equivalent
problem in significantly reduced space could be obtained. The final clustering could be then recovered from the obtained solution,
while P can be chosen to be much smaller than N so that the running time could grow almost linearly to N [10]. We plan to address
the above limitations in our future work.

Qualitative Evaluation

The key idea of our recommendation approach is the incorporation
of group knowledge into recommendation via detecting relevant
user communities from multiple social multimedia data sources.
The evaluation against the baselines indirectly shows the ability of
C 3 R framework to detect important user communities. To support
our answer to RQ2 and demonstrate the community detection performance explicitly, in Table 2, we have listed the profiles of the 3
largest user communities detected in Singapore. User profiles are
constructed as a “bag-of-words” over textual, visual, and location
data modalities. From the table, it can be seen that most popular
data representations (“words”) in all data modalities are consistent
with each other and represent distinct user communities. For example, the user community “Com1” is represented by words: “device”,
“launcher”, “android”; visual concepts: “mouse”, “digital clock”, “hard
disk”; and venue categories: “electronics store”, “startup”, “technology building”. We thus named this community as “Gadgets”. The
distinctness of detected user communities allows C 3 R to perform

7

CONCLUSION

In this paper, we presented a study on cross-source collaborative
recommendation. The proposed recommendation framework C 3 R
utilizes both individual and group knowledge to solve a task of
venue category recommendation. Individual knowledge is modeled
as the distribution among venue categories that user has visited
in past, while group knowledge is modeled as the distribution of
Foursquare venue categories among user community members.
The user communities are detected based on novel regularized
spectral clustering approach that is able to perform an efficient
partitioning of multi-layer user relations graph. By performing
comprehensive evaluation against the state-of-the-art baselines
and different data source combinations, we demonstrated that our
proposed user-community-empowered venue category recommendation framework can achieve superior recommendation performance. Additionally, we contributed a new fully-automated method

203

Session 2B: Filtering and Recommending 1

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

for inter-network relationship graph construction, which eliminates
the necessity of involving a pre-defined expert knowledge.

8

[27] Y. Koren. Factorization meets the neighborhood: a multifaceted collaborative
filtering model. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM SIGKDD international conference
on Knowledge discovery and data mining. ACM, 2008.
[28] R. B. Lehoucq and D. C. Sorensen. Deflation techniques for an implicitly restarted
arnoldi iteration. SIAM Journal on Matrix Analysis and Applications, 1996.
[29] T. Li, M. Ogihara, and S. Ma. On combining multiple clusterings. In Proceedings of
the 13th ACM international conference on Information and knowledge management,
2004.
[30] H. Lutkepohl. Handbook of matrices. Computational Statistics and Data Analysis,
1997.
[31] Y. Mejova, H. Haddadi, A. Noulas, and I. Weber. # foodporn: Obesity patterns
in culinary interactions. In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on
Digital Health, 2015.
[32] A. S. Niaraki and K. Kim. Ontology based personalized route planning system
using a multi-criteria decision making approach. Expert Systems with Applications,
2009.
[33] L. Nie, L. Zhang, M. Wang, R. Hong, A. Farseev, and T.-S. Chua. Learning user
attributes via mobile social multimedia analytics. ACM Transactions on Intelligent
Systems and Technology (TIST), 8(3):36, 2017.
[34] A. Noulas, S. Scellato, N. Lathia, and C. Mascolo. Mining user mobility features
for next place prediction in location-based services. In Proceedings of the Data
mining (ICDM), 2012 IEEE 12th international conference on, 2012.
[35] D. Pelleg, A. W. Moore, et al. X-means: Extending k-means with efficient estimation of the number of clusters. In ICML, volume 1, 2000.
[36] J. W. Pennebaker, M. E. Francis, and R. J. Booth. Linguistic inquiry and word
count: Liwc 2001. Mahway: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2001.
[37] S. Qian, T. Zhang, R. Hong, and C. Xu. Cross-domain collaborative learning
in social multimedia. In Proceedings of the 23rd Annual ACM Conference on
Multimedia, 2015.
[38] Y. Qu and J. Zhang. Trade area analysis using user generated mobile location
data. In Proceedings of the 22nd international conference on World Wide Web, 2013.
[39] S. Rendle. Factorization machines with libFM. ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol.,
3(3).
[40] D. Rhouma and L. B. Romdhane. An efficient algorithm for community mining
with overlap in social networks. Expert Systems with Applications, 41(9), 2014.
[41] J. Sander, M. Ester, H.-P. Kriegel, and X. Xu. Density-based clustering in spatial databases: The algorithm gdbscan and its applications. Data mining and
knowledge discovery, 1998.
[42] B. Sarwar, G. Karypis, J. Konstan, and J. Riedl. Item-based collaborative filtering
recommendation algorithms. In Proceedings of the 10th international conference
on World Wide Web, 2001.
[43] J. Shi and J. Malik. Normalized cuts and image segmentation. Transactions on
Patt. Anal. and M. Intelligence, 2000.
[44] X. Song, L. Nie, L. Zhang, M. Liu, and T. Chua. Interest inference via structureconstrained multi-source multi-task learning. In Proceedings of the International
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2015.
[45] W.-C. Su. Integrating and mining virtual communities across multiple online
social networks: Concepts, approaches and challenges. In 4th International
Conference on digital Inf. and comm-n Tech. and it’s App. IEEE, 2014.
[46] J. C. Teixeira and A. P. Antunes. A hierarchical location model for public facility
planning. European Journal of Operational Research, 2008.
[47] A. Tiroshi, S. Berkovsky, M. A. Kaafar, T. Chen, and T. Kuflik. Cross social
networks interests predictions based ongraph features. In Proceedings of the 7th
ACM conference on Recommender systems. ACM, 2013.
[48] S. Trewin. Knowledge-based recommender systems. Encyclopedia of Library and
Information Science: Volume 69-Supplement 32, 2000.
[49] M. H. Veiga and C. Eickhoff. Privacy leakage through innocent content sharing
in online social networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.02714, 2016.
[50] U. Von Luxburg. A tutorial on spectral clustering. Statistics and computing, 2007.
[51] D. Wagner and F. Wagner. Between min cut and graph bisection. Springer, 1993.
[52] X. Wang, X. He, L. Nie, and T. Chua. Item silk road: Recommending items
from information domains to social users. In Proceedings of the 40th ACM SIGIR
Conference. ACM, 2017.
[53] X. Wang, L. Nie, X. Song, D. Zhang, and T. Chua. Unifying virtual and physical
worlds: Learning toward local and global consistency. ACM Transactions on
Information Systems (TOIS), 36(1):4, 2017.
[54] X. Wang, Y.-L. Zhao, L. Nie, Y. Gao, W. Nie, Z.-J. Zha, and T. Chua. Semanticbased location recommendation with multimodal venue semantics. Transactions
on MM, 2015.
[55] P. Winoto and T. Tang. If you like the devil wears prada the book, will you also enjoy the devil wears prada the movie? a study of cross-domain recommendations.
New Generation Computing, 2008.
[56] M. Yan, J. Sang, and C. Xu. Unified youtube video recommendation via crossnetwork collaboration. In Proceedings of the 5th ACM on International Conference
on Multimedia Retrieval, 2015.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

NExT++ research center is supported by the National Research
Foundation, Prime Minister’s Office, Singapore under its IRC@SG
Funding Initiative.

REFERENCES
[1] F. Abel, S. Araújo, Q. Gao, and G.-J. Houben. Analyzing cross-system user
modeling on the social web. In International Conference on Web Engineering.
Springer, 2011.
[2] G. Adomavicius and A. Tuzhilin. Toward the next generation of recommender
systems: A survey of the state-of-the-art and possible extensions. IEEE transactions on knowledge and data engineering, 2005.
[3] M. Akbari, X. Hu, N. Liqiang, and T. Chua. From tweets to wellness: Wellness
event detection from twitter streams. In Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2016.
[4] M.-D. Albakour, R. Deveaud, C. Macdonald, I. Ounis, et al. Diversifying contextual
suggestions from location-based social networks. In Proceedings of the 5th
Information Interaction in Context Symposium, pages 125–134. ACM, 2014.
[5] A. Ambrus, B. Greiner, P. Pathak, et al. Group versus individual decision-making:
Is there a shift. W. Paper 91, 2009.
[6] K. Buraya, A. Farseev, A. Filchenkov, and T. Chua. Towards user personality
profiling from multiple social networks. In Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2017.
[7] R. Burke. Integrating knowledge-based and collaborative-filtering recommender
systems. In Proceedings of the Workshop on AI and Electronic Commerce, 1999.
[8] P. R. Center. Social networking fact sheet. http://www.pewinternet.org/
fact-sheet/social-media.
[9] J. Chen, H. Zhang, X. He, L. Nie, W. Liu, and T. Chua. Attentive collaborative
filtering: Multimedia recommendation with item- and component-level attention.
In Proceedings of the 40th ACM SIGIR Conference. ACM, 2017.
[10] Y. Chen, C. Zhuang, Q. Cao, and P. Hui. Understanding cross-site linking in
online social networks. In Proceedings of the 8th Workshop on Soc. Net. Mining
and Analysis, 2014.
[11] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
hierarchical image database. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2009.
CVPR 2009. IEEE Conference on. IEEE, 2009.
[12] X. Dong, P. Frossard, P. Vandergheynst, and N. Nefedov. Clustering on multilayer graphs via subspace analysis on grassmann manifolds. IEEE Transactions
on Signal Processing, 2014.
[13] D. Eppstein, M. S. Paterson, and F. F. Yao. On nearest-neighbor graphs. Disc. &
Comp. Geometry, 1997.
[14] A. Farseev, M. Akbari, I. Samborskii, and T. Chua. 360◦ user profiling: past,
future, and applications. ACM SIGWEB Newsletter, (Summer), 2016.
[15] A. Farseev and T. Chua. Tweet can be fit: Integrating data from wearable sensors
and multiple social networks for wellness profile learning. ACM Transactions on
Information Systems (TOIS), 2017.
[16] A. Farseev and T. Chua. Tweetfit: Fusing multiple social media and sensor data
for wellness profile learning. In Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence. AAAI, 2017.
[17] A. Farseev, N. Gukov, I. Gossoudarev, and U. Zarichnyak. Cross-platform online
venue and user community recommendation based upon social networks data
mining. Computer Instruments in Education, 6:28–38, 2014.
[18] A. Farseev, D. Kotkov, A. Semenov, J. Veijalainen, and T. Chua. Cross-social
network collaborative recommendation. ACM International Conference on Web
Science, 2015.
[19] A. Farseev, L. Nie, M. Akbari, and T. Chua. Harvesting multiple sources for user
profile learning: a big data study. In Proceedings of the 5th ACM on International
Conference on Multimedia Retrieval, 2015.
[20] A. Farseev, I. Samborskii, and T. Chua. bbridge: A big data platform for social
multimedia analytics. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM on Multimedia Conference,
pages 759–761. ACM, 2016.
[21] S. Fortunato. Community detection in graphs. Physics Reports, 2010.
[22] G. H. Golub and C. F. Van Loan. Matrix computations. 2012.
[23] J. A. Hartigan and M. A. Wong. Algorithm as 136: A k-means clustering algorithm.
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series C (Applied Statistics), 1979.
[24] X. He, H. Zhang, M.-Y. Kan, and T. Chua. Fast matrix factorization for online
recommendation with implicit feedback. In Proceedings of the 39th ACM SIGIR
Conference, 2016.
[25] S. Helgason. The radon transform on euclidean spaces, compact two-point
homogeneous spaces and grassmann manifolds. Acta Mathematica, 1965.
[26] R. Hu and P. Pu. Helping users perceive recommendation diversity. In Proceedings
of the Workshop on novelty and diversity in recommender systems., 2011.

204

