Keynote 2

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Mail Search: It’s Getting Personal!
Yoelle Maarek
Yahoo Research
MATAM Park, Haifa 31905, Israel
yoelle@yahoo.com

ABSTRACT

Computer Science from the Technion. Upon graduating, she
joined IBM Research first in the US then in Israel, eventually
becoming an IBM Distinguished Engineer. She later joined
Google, as its first engineer in Israel and opened the Haifa
engineering center. Her team there developed several
notable features including Suggest, the Google query completion
service. She returned to research, upon joining Yahoo, where she
today serves as site manager of the Haifa office and guides the
research organization of Yahoo worldwide. She has been serving
in various senior roles at most of the recent SIGIR, WWW and
WSDM conferences. She is a member of the Technion Board of
Governors, and was inducted as an ACM Fellow in 2013.

Web Mail has significantly changed in the last decade. It keeps
growing with 90% of its traffic being generated by automated
scripts or “machines”, [1]. At the same time, major mail services
offer more and more free storage, ranging from 15GB for Gmail
and Outlook.com to 1TB for Yahoo mail. As a result, we keep
accumulating messages in our inbox, rarely deleting (and
sometimes not even opening) many, [2]. Our inbox has become a
big store mixing important information, such as e-tickets or bills,
together with newsletters or promotions, from which we forgot
to unsubscribe. Search is therefore a critical mechanism in order
to retrieve the specific messages we need. Unfortunately, search
in mail is far from being as trusted (and used) as in the Web
today. Everything is personal and often private, from the content
of the mailbox, to the search strategies, users’ needs and queries,
thus making traditional Web search techniques inapplicable “as
is”. Failure is evident when we can’t find a message that we
remember having read, and this increases our frustration. Most
mail search services return sorted-by-time results in order for us
to scan results chronologically and increase our perception of
perfect recall. At the same time, the ranking mechanism drops
less relevant results, in order to prevent them from being ranked
first if recent. So in order to increase a (false) perception of recall,
these systems actually hurt recall! Ranking results by mailspecific relevance would actually increase search success, [3] yet
it is not widely adopted, with the exceptions of Inbox by Gmail
and Yahoo Mail that show a few relevant results on top of
traditional ranked-by-time results [4]. In addition, many of us
still struggle with expressing our needs, typically issuing very
short queries, like in the early days of the Web [5]. In this talk, I
will first highlight the key characteristics of mail search and how
they differ from Web search, in terms of searchers’ needs and
behavior [2,5]. I will then present recent progress in mail ranking
[3,4] as well as in query assistance tools [5,6]. Finally, I will
discuss directions for future research, and the need to revisit mail
search and invent search mechanisms specifically tailored to the
personal data store that our inbox has become.

REFERENCES
[1]

Yoelle Maarek, Web Mail is not dead! It’s just not human anymore.
WWW’2017, Perth, Australia, April 2017.

[2]

Dotan Di Castro, Zohar Karnin, Liane Lewin-Eytan, and Yoelle
Maarek. You’ve got mail, and here is what you could do with it!
Analyzing and predicting actions on email messages. WSDM’2016,
San Francisco, CA, Feb 2016.

[3]

David Carmel, Guy Halawi, Liane Lewin-Eytan, Yoelle Maarek and
Ariel Raviv. Rank by time of by relevance? Revisiting Email Search.
CIKM'2015, Melbourne Australia, Oct 2015.

[4]

David Carmel, Liane Lewin-Eytan, Alex Libov, Yoelle Maarek, Ariel
Raviv, Promoting Relevant Results in Time-Ranked Mail Search,
WWW’2017, Perth, Australia, April 2017.

[5]

David Carmel, Liane Lewin-Eytan, Alex Libov, Yoelle Maarek, Ariel
Raviv, The Demographics of Mail Search and their Application to
Query Suggestion, WWW’2017, Perth, Australia, April 2017.

[6]

Michal Horovitz, Liane Lewin-Eytan, Alexander Libov, Yoelle
Maarek and Ariel Raviv, Mailbox-Based vs. Log-Based Query
Completion for Mail Search. SIGIR'2017, (short paper), Tokyo,
Japan, August 2017.

BIOGRAPHY
Yoelle Maarek is Vice-President of Research at Yahoo. She holds
an engineering degree from the Ecole des Ponts et Chaussees, a
DEA in Computer Science from Paris VI university and a PhD in
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this
work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.
SIGIR '17, August 07-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan.
© 2017 Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5022-8/17/08.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3077136.3080642

3

