Short Research Paper

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Unifying Multi-Source Social Media Data for Personalized
Travel Route Planning
Gang Hu

Jie Shao∗

Fumin Shen

Center for Future Media
University of Electronic Science and
Technology of China
hugang@std.uestc.edu.cn

Center for Future Media
University of Electronic Science and
Technology of China
shaojie@uestc.edu.cn

Center for Future Media
University of Electronic Science and
Technology of China
fshen@uestc.edu.cn

Zi Huang

Heng Tao Shen

School of Information Technology &
Electrical Engineering
The University of Queensland
huang@itee.uq.edu.au

Center for Future Media
University of Electronic Science and
Technology of China
shenhengtao@uestc.edu.cn

ABSTRACT
Travel route planning aims to mine user’s attributes and recommend personalized routes. How to build interest model for users
and understand their real intention brings great challenges. This
paper presents an approach which mines the user interest model by
multi-source social media (e.g., travelogues and check-in records),
and understands the user’s real intention by active behavior such
as point of interest (POI) inputs. In order to unify heterogeneous
data from different sources, a topical package is built as the measurement space. Based on the topical package, user topical package is modeled to find user interest and route topical package is
constructed to describe the attributes of each route. User’s active
behavior can also be considered during route planning, where top
ranked routes are finally recommended. The proposed multi-source
topical package (MSTP) approach is evaluated on a real dataset and
compared with two state-of-the-art methods. The result shows that
MSTP performs better for providing personalized travel routes.

Figure 1: Framework of MSTP approach.

main issues for recommending personalized travel routes based
on user’s historical information from social media. Firstly, how to
map the sematic information from social media to a unified space
and measure the multi-source data with different formats. To this
end, topical package model can be applied to get a measurement
space. Secondly, how to model the user interest (especially, with
the cold start problem) and understand user real intention. On the
one hand, user’s historical data can be mined to model the user interest. On the other hand, we can utilize the active behavior when
a user seeks help from route planning. Thirdly, how to measure the
similarity between user and route remains challenging. The topical
package model provides an effective way to address it.
In this work, we map travel trajectories obtained from social
media (e.g., travelogues and check-in records) to a topical package
space. For each topic and point of interest (POI), some representative tags are extracted from travelogues which reflect the interest
of user and route. The consumption capability of user and the cost
of each POI are important for travel planning, so the cost of each
topic and POI is also trained from the travelogues. Moreover, the
visiting season and duration of stay correspond to user preference,
and we further mine them from the trajectories of check-in records.
Based on this topical package, multi-source data can be mapped to
a unified measurement space, so that matching user with route for
personalized recommendation can be achieved.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems → Personalization; Recommender systems;

KEYWORDS
social media; user interest; topical package; route planning

1

INTRODUCTION

In recent years, we have witnessed the maturity of various social
media platforms. Social media data not only record human behavior but also reflect their interest and intention. There are several
∗ Corresponding

author.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR’17, August 7–11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan.
© 2017 ACM. 978-1-4503-5022-8/17/08. . . $15.00.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3077136.3080672

893

Short Research Paper

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Figure 1 shows the framework of our approach, which contains
offline modules and online modules. We build measurement topical package, user topical package and route topical package firstly,
followed by trave route planning. The offline modules aim at constructing topical package space, mining POIs and popular routes,
and corresponding routes topical package models. The online modules aim at modeling user topical package and recommending popular routes. First, the topical package measurement space is mined
offline from social media combining travelogues and check-in records.
Representative tags, average consumer expenditure, the distribution of visiting season and the distribution of duration of stay are
obtained in this step. Based on this topical package measurement
space, the route topical package are mined. Since a route is formed
by a sequence of POIs, the second step is mapping social media data
related to the POIs on the route to the topical package space. During online planning, the user topical package is obtained from the
user’s historical travelogues and check-in records. In travel route
planning module, the similarity of user and route can be measured
in the topical package measurement space, so that candidate routes
will be ranked. Then, top ranked routes are further optimized by
users’ active behaviors as the final results.
In summary, the main contributions of our work are:
• We utilize multi-source social media data mapped to a unified measurement space for personalized travel route planning.
• Our approach not only models user interest by historical
data but also understands real intention by active behavior.
Four factors including user interest, consumption capability, visiting season and preferred time are considered.
• Experiment on a real dataset shows that compared with
famous route planning (FAM) and topical package model
(TPM) [4], our approach performs better for finding interest, understanding real intention, and route planning.

2

RELATED WORK

In previous studies, four types of social media data have been mainly
investigated for constructing popular routes in travel recommendation, including GPS trajectories [8], check-in records [6, 7], travelogues [1] and geo-tagged photos [2].
Spatial information (location) is fundamental for POI mining.
Location-based collaborative filtering (LCF) is the most famous
method. In LCF, the location co-occurrence of previously visited
POIs is used to measure the similarity of social users. Text description can contribute to the user interest modeling and route
attribute mining. Particularly, multi-source data can form a complementary solution for data sparsity and cold start problem. Famous route planning is commonly used in recommending the most
famous routes, but no personalization is taken into consideration.
Topical package model can map different data into a space to measure the similarity, and it is used in our approach. Among topical
package model based works, Jiang et al. [4] also use multi-source
big social media to build topical package for user and route. However, different from our work, neither duration of stay nor user
active input has been taken into consideration. Yu et al. [6] propose a personalized travel package method with multi-point-ofinterest recommendation. However, they use only location data,

and only return a set of POIs rather than an ordered sequence. Liu
et al. [5] propose a personalized travel package recommendations.
However, the travel package candidates are not collected with real
time, which results in the information used is static and might be
out of date.

3 MULTI-SOURCE TOPICAL PACKAGE
We provide personalized travel routes based on user’s travel attributes mined from travel records, which include travel interest,
consumption capacity, visiting season and duration of stay. In this
way, not the most famous routes but the routes meeting user’s
travel attributes as much as possible can be recommended. In order to measure the attributes of user and route, a topical package
measurement space is constructed by multi-source data, and based
on this space, user topical package and route topical package are
built.

3.1 Topical Package Measurement Space
Topical package measurement space is a kind of space to bridge the
gap between the attributes of user and route. We use travelogues
and check-in records as training data for its construction. Four factors of each topic are considered: (1) representative tags are mined
from travelogues for each topic and POI to describe the travel interest, (2) average consumer expenditure of the POIs and topics is
also mined from travelogues, (3) the distribution of visiting season
is mined from check-in records, (4) the distribution of duration of
stay is also mined from check-in records.
In our work, we downloaded travelogues of POIs on nine most
famous cities of the world from IgoUgo.com. The topic category
definition and POIs are available and can be used directly. In our
opinions, representative tags are not only of high frequency but
also can distinguish a topic from others. After removing the meaningless symbols and stop words such as “in" and “my", term frequencyinverse document frequency (TF-IDF) is leveraged to get the representative tags and corresponding scores. For the i-th topic, a set
j
of tags αi and corresponding tag scores τi are obtained.
The cost matrix for all topics is defined as β (M) which is an N ∗4
matrix (N is the number of topics, and 4 is the cost rank). In order
to evaluate the cost of each topic, we focus on the sentences containing numbers and symbols such as “$" or “e". After selecting
these sentences, natural language processing (NLP) is used to process each of them for selecting sentences related to cost. First, a
tool1 is used to learn feature of each sentence. Then, text classifier
is trained with positive samples and negative samples to get the
cost. In this step, sentences which contain numbers and relate to
cost are defined as positive samples. On the contrary, sentences
which contain numbers but are not related to cost are defined as
negative samples. Finally, the average cost is used to represent the
cost for each topic. We divide the cost to four rates: (1) less than
$10, (2) from $10 to $30, (3) from $30 to $50, (4) more than $50. If
the average cost belongs to a rate, its value is 1. For example, if the
cost of a topic is $25, the corresponding cost vector in β (M) is [0, 1,
0, 0]. At the same time, the cost matrix of POI β (P ) is also obtained.
1 http://faridani.github.io/MatlabNLP/

894

Short Research Paper

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

As for γ (U ) and ζ (U ) , the similar method to β (U ) is applied to
and topical package. Thus, we get user topical package model
[α (U ) , β (U ) ,γ (U ) , ζ (U ) ].

Before mining the topic’s visiting season, we leverage the checkin records to get POIs and match them with the POIs in travelogues.
First, a set of meaningless check-in records should be filtered for
each city. We match check-in content with city name (e.g., Los Angeles), to divide the check-in record sets. The geo-location restriction is further used for refinement. Then, the timestamp of checkin records is used to evaluate the visiting season. For example, if
the timestamp of a check-in record is “2012-03-12, 13:32:46", the
corresponding season is spring. The season matrices of POI and
topic are defined as γ (P ) and γ (M) . The corresponding season vector in γ (P ) or γ (M) is defined as [spring, summer, autumn, winter],
with a normalization applied.
As for the duration of stay, the interval in check-in records between POIs is used. We also split the duration of stay to four rates
as [less than 2h, 2h-4h, 4h-6h, beyond 6h]. The average duration of
stay of POIs describes the duration of stay of the topic. Therefore,
the durations of stay of POI ζ (P ) and topic ζ (M) are obtained.

3.2

α (U )

3.3 Mining Route Topical Package
The route topical package mining is processed offline. Since a route
is formed by a sequence of POIs, the route topical package is based
on the POIs’ packages. The average value of all the POIs on the
route is used to get route topical package model for a route. Why
we select the distribution of POIs to a route is that a POI may appear in multiple topics. Therefore, a POI should not be classified
to a certain topic, but topic distribution can represent the different
degree of the POI towards each topic.
The POI cost distribution β (P ) , POI visiting season distribution
(P
γ ) and POI duration of stay ζ (P ) have been obtained in Section 3.1.
As for route interest distribution α, we map POIs of the route to
the topical package space to represent the POIs’ topic interest dis(P )
(P )
(P )
(P )
tribution as α (P ) = [θ 1 , ..., θk , ..., θ N ]. θk is the ratio between
the number of tags belonging to the k-th topic and the number of
tags of the corresponding POI, which is also normalized as:

Modeling User Topical Package

Next, we introduce the user topical package, which includes user
topic interest distribution α (U ) , user consumption capability β (U ) ,
user travel time distribution γ (U ) , and user preferred duration of
stay ζ (U ) .
Based on the user’s historical travelogues and check-in records,
we extract the tags in topical package, whose frequency can reflect the user’s interest. If a user’s tag appearers frequently in one
topic and less in others, it suggests a higher interest towards the
topic. The tag distribution of all topics is represented as α (U ) =
(U )
(U )
(U )
(U )
[θ 1 , ..., θk , ..., θ N ]. θk is the ratio between the number of
tags belonging to the k-th topic and the number of tags of the corresponding user, which is also normalized as:

(P )′

(P )
θk
(P )′

where θk
value

(U )

(U )′

where θk

(1)

=

τik

is obtained as:

=

nP
Õ

τik

(5)

i =1

(6)

γ (P ) and ζ (P ) can be obtained in the same way.
The route topical package [α (R) , β (R) ,γ (R) , ζ (R) ] is the average
over α (P ) , β (P ) , γ (P ) , ζ (P ) for all the POIs. The method to obtain
α (R) is as follow:
Ín1 (P i )
α
(7)
α (R) = i =1
n1

(2)

i =1

′ is the number of tags of user U and τ k is the correspondwhere nU
i
ing score of the i-th tag for the k-th topic. The frequency of tags
can reflect the user’s interest. In this way, the user topical interest
distribution is obtained.
To overcome data sparsity, the user consumption capability β (U ) ,
user travel time distribution γ (U ) and user preferred duration of
stay ζ (U ) will be obtained with the assist of user topic interest distribution α (U ) and topical package. The method to get β (U ) is:

β (U ) = α (U ) · β (M)

represents the count of POI’s tags towards topic k. The

(P )′
of θk

β (P ) = α (P ) · γ (M)

′

nU
Õ

(4)

where n P′ is the number of tags of POI P and τik is the corresponding score of the i-th tag for the k-th topic.
As for β (P ) , the method is as follow:

is obtained as:
(U )′
θk

(P )′
i =1 θi

′

represents the count of user’ tags towards topic k. The

(U )′

value of θk

θ
= Í k
n θ (U )′
i =1 i

= Í
n

(P )′
θk

(U )′

θk

θk

where n 1 denotes the number of POIs for route R. β (R) , γ (R) and
ζ (R) can be obtained in the same way.

4 TRAVE ROUTE PLANNING
After obtaining the user topical package and route topical package, we introduce the method of travel route planning. If a users
inputs some interested POIs, it is accepted that these POIs are important. Thus, we firstly retrieve a set routes R = {r 1 , ..., r n } which
contain the necessary POIs as the candidate routes. If the user
does not actively input the interested POIs, a set of most popular
routes R = {r 1 , ..., r n } will be obtained and ranked as the candidate routes. Based on the candidate routes, the similarity of each
attribute among travel interest, cost, season and duration of stay

(3)

where β (U ) is an N ∗ 1 matrix. The cost distribution of all the topics and distribution of user’s topic interests are used to represent
user’s consumption capability.

895

Short Research Paper

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

between user i and route j will be computed. The similarity of travel

1

(α )

interest φ (i, j) is measured as:

FAM
MSTP
TPM

0.9
0.8

(α )

φ (i, j) =

(R)

· αj

AP@r

(U )

αi

(8)

(U )
(R)
kαi k kα j k

0.7
0.6
0.5

(β )

(γ )

The similarity of travel cost φ (i, j) , travel time φ (i, j) and travel du-

0.4

(ζ )
of stay φ (i, j)

ration
can be obtained in the same way.
Then, the global similarity between user i and route j is:
(β )

(α )

(γ )

(ζ )

φ (i, j) = w α ∗ φ (i, j) + w β ∗ φ (i, j) + w γ ∗ φ (i, j) + w ζ ∗ φ (i, j)

0.3
1

(9)

(10)

Our experiment is conduced on a dataset from IgoUgo.com which
consists of travelogues and check-in records. For travelogues, the
number is 24,008 and the number of travel POIs in nine famous
cities is 864 [3]. There are 2,892 users, 307 POIs and 150,101 checkin records after removing missing data.

Methodology

We compare our multi-source topical package (MSTP) approach
with two state-of-the-art methods for travel route planning:
• Famous route planning (FAM). This method recommends
the most famous routes, without personalization. Compared
with shortest path or fastest path based routes planning,
FAM is data driven and it takes the collective intelligence
into consideration.
• Topical package model (TPM) [4]. This method mines the
user’s interest and route’s attributes as well. However, it
does not consider the duration of stay, and has not incorporated the user active behavior to understand real intention.
We use the average precision with top-r routes (AP@r ) as the
performance metric.

5.3

5

intelligence but no personalization. Topical package based methods (TPM and MSTP) perform much better, showing their advantages in finding user interest and preference. The reason is that
they both leverage social media data to mine user attribute and
route attribute. However, for TPM, no active behavior to understand real intention is its critical defect. Our proposed MSTP outperforms TPM. The duration of stay is considered as a factor to
mine the topical package, which is useful to help find the user interested routes, and the user’s active behavior (POI inputs) can assist to understand the real intention to remove some routes (which
are famous, but less likely to meet user’s interest).
Conclusion: Based on above discussion, the proposed MSTP
utilizing multi-source social media data to construct topical package achieves better performance in modeling user interest, understanding real intention and travel planning.

5 EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
5.1 Dataset

AP@r =

4

Figure 2: Performance comparison of FAM, MSTP and TPM.

Finally, the top-r routes with maximum weight φ (i, j) will be recommended to user i as the final routes.

5.2

3
r

where w α , w β , w γ and w ζ are weights of the topic interest, cost,
visiting season and duration of stay. The constraint condition is:
w α + w β + wγ + w ζ = 1

2

the number o f matched POIs
(the number o f POIs in a route) ∗ r

Result

Figure 2 shows the comparison of FAM, MSTP and TPM. Due to
page limit only the performance when w α , w β , w γ and w ζ in Equation 9 are 0.5, 0.2, 0.2 and 0.1 respectively is reported here and
this set of parameters selection is relatively optimal. On the one
hand, with r in AP@r increasing, the performances of MSPT and
TPM decrease. That is to say, TPM and MSTP are good at finding
user interest in the top ranked routes. On the other hand, we can
see that FAM performs poor with any r compared with TPM and
MSTP. FAM only selects the most popular routes, with collective

896

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grants No. 61672133 and No. 61632007), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (grants No.
ZYGX2015J058 and No. ZYGX2014Z007).

REFERENCES
[1] Xinhuan Chen, Yong Zhang, Pengfei Ma, Chao Li, and Chunxiao Xing. 2015. A
Package Generation and Recommendation Framework Based on Travelogues.
In 39th IEEE Annual Computer Software and Applications Conference, COMPSAC
2015, Taichung, Taiwan, July 1-5, 2015. Volume 2. 692–701.
[2] Yan-Ying Chen, An-Jung Cheng, and Winston H. Hsu. 2013. Travel Recommendation by Mining People Attributes and Travel Group Types From CommunityContributed Photos. IEEE Trans. Multimedia 15, 6 (2013), 1283–1295.
[3] Maarten Clements, Pavel Serdyukov, Arjen P. de Vries, and Marcel J. T. Reinders.
2011. Personalised Travel Recommendation based on Location Co-occurrence.
CoRR abs/1106.5213 (2011).
[4] Shuhui Jiang, Xueming Qian, Tao Mei, and Yun Fu. 2016. Personalized Travel
Sequence Recommendation on Multi-Source Big Social Media. IEEE Trans. Big
Data 2, 1 (2016), 43–56.
[5] Qi Liu, Enhong Chen, Hui Xiong, Yong Ge, Zhongmou Li, and Xiang Wu. 2014.
A Cocktail Approach for Travel Package Recommendation. IEEE Trans. Knowl.
Data Eng. 26, 2 (2014), 278–293.
[6] Zhiwen Yu, Huang Xu, Zhe Yang, and Bin Guo. 2016. Personalized Travel Package With Multi-Point-of-Interest Recommendation Based on Crowdsourced
User Footprints. IEEE Trans. Human-Machine Systems 46, 1 (2016), 151–158.
[7] Chenyi Zhang, Hongwei Liang, Ke Wang, and Jianling Sun. 2015. Personalized
Trip Recommendation with POI Availability and Uncertain Traveling Time. In
Proceedings of the 24th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, CIKM 2015, Melbourne, VIC, Australia, October 19 - 23, 2015.
911–920.
[8] Jie Zhu, Wei Jiang, An Liu, Guanfeng Liu, and Lei Zhao. 2017. Effective and efficient trajectory outlier detection based on time-dependent popular route. World
Wide Web 20, 1 (2017), 111–134.

