Short Research Paper

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Predicting Session Length in Media Streaming
Theodore Vasiloudis∗

Hossein Vahabi

RISE SICS
Stockholm, Sweden
tvas@sics.se

Pandora Media Inc.
Oakland, USA
puya@pandora.com

Ross Kravitz

Valery Rashkov

Pandora Media Inc.
Oakland, USA
rkravitz@pandora.com

Pandora Media Inc.
Oakland, USA
vrashkov@pandora.com

ABSTRACT

interaction as a user session, and the time it takes from start to finish
as the length of the user session.
Being able to predict the length of a session is important, because
it allows the service provider to optimize the user experience along
with its business goals. In terms of user experience, session length
can be a useful signal for a recommendation engine. For a music
streaming service, where users typically consume multiple items
in a single session, the recommendation system can be tuned to be
more exploratory or exploitative, based on the expected length of
the session. On the business side, services often need to present
ads to users to generate revenue, but there is a limit on how many
ads a user will tolerate within one session [6]. The length of a
session provides a vital data point for the trade-off between user
satisfaction and generated revenue. By having an estimate of the
length of a session early on, ads can be rescheduled so that the
revenue target (i.e. number of ads presented) is maintained while
minimizing the annoyance to users.
The length of user sessions can be hard to predict, because of two
main factors: First, there exist a number of extraneous parameters
that can affect session length, that are difficult to model based only
on data that are available to an online service. Sessions can start and
end for any number of reasons: users entering/exiting the subway,
arriving at home or work etc. Second, user interactions commonly
exhibit long-tail distributions; see for example dwell time studies
[7, 9], phone call duration [10] and Section 3 of this study. This, in
combination with the lack of predictive features makes it harder
to correctly place the probability mass of predictive models. In
this work we mitigate this issue by using an appropriate objective
function for our model.
Most of the related research has focused on website visits, modeling the time spent on a clicked result (dwell time) after a search
[2, 7] or an ad click [1, 8]. This type of interaction is very different
from the way users consume items on a media streaming service. In
a web search or ad click scenario, users enter a query or click on an
ad, check the result and leave the website, in a “screen-and-glean”
behavior [9]. In a media streaming service, users may interact very
little with the platform, but have very long sessions (“lean-back”
behavior), or have exploratory sessions, constantly revising their
selection until settling down or abandoning the session. We show
in Section 3.3 that 44% of the users exhibit “negative-aging” length
distributions, i.e. sessions that become less likely to end as they
grow longer.

Session length is a very important aspect in determining a user’s
satisfaction with a media streaming service. Being able to predict
how long a session will last can be of great use for various downstream tasks, such as recommendations and ad scheduling. Most
of the related literature on user interaction duration has focused
on dwell time for websites, usually in the context of approximating
post-click satisfaction either in search results, or display ads.
In this work we present the first analysis of session length in a
mobile-focused online service, using a real world data-set from a
major music streaming service. We use survival analysis techniques
to show that the characteristics of the length distributions can
differ significantly between users, and use gradient boosted trees
with appropriate objectives to predict the length of a session using
only information available at its beginning. Our evaluation on real
world data illustrates that our proposed technique outperforms the
considered baseline.

KEYWORDS
User Behavior; Survival Analysis; Dwell Time; Session Length
ACM Reference format:
Theodore Vasiloudis, Hossein Vahabi, Ross Kravitz, and Valery Rashkov.
2017. Predicting Session Length in Media Streaming. In Proceedings of SIGIR
’17, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan, August 07-11, 2017, 4 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3077136.3080695

1

INTRODUCTION

More and more people these days use online services to consume
media. Whether they are consuming videos or music, users start
an interaction with a service, consume a number of items, and
after some time end their interaction. We refer to this complete
∗ Part

of this work was performed during an internship at Pandora Media Inc.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR ’17, August 07-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan
© 2017 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5022-8/17/08. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3077136.3080695

977

Short Research Paper

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

To summarize, the key contributions of this study are the following:

5
4

• We provide an analysis of user session length in an online
media streaming service, using the Weibull distribution in
Section 3.
• We develop a predictive model for session length using
contextual and user-based features with appropriate objective functions in Section 4 and present experimental results
in Section 5.

2

h(t)

Shape (k)

●

●

●

●

●

●

0

●

1.5
1
0.5

●
●
●
0

1

2

3

4

t

RELATED WORK

Figure 1: The failure rate of the Weibull distribution for different values of the shape parameter, k. We set λ = 1.
The effect of k can be better illustrated by the hazard rate (or
hazard function) which gives us the failure rate of an item that has
survived up to time t. For the Weibull distribution it is given by:
k  t  (k −1)
(2)
λ λ
The effect of k is illustrated in Figure 1. For values 0 < k < 1
the hazard rate decreases as time increases. This behavior is often
described as “negative aging” or “infant mortality” failures, where
defective units might fail early on, but as time goes on and defective
units get weeded out, the probability of a unit failing decreases. For
k > 1 the probability of failure increases with time. This type of
failures are called “wear-out” failures, when units become more
likely to fail with time. For k = 1 the failure rate is constant and
the distribution is equivalent to the exponential distribution.
h(t) =

3.2

Data

The dataset we use comes from user interaction data from a major
ad supported music streaming service. We define a user session as
a period of continuous listening, demarcated by breaks or pauses
of 30 minutes or longer, i.e. a new session is started if a user stops
or pauses the music for 30 minutes or more. We gathered data from
a random subset of users for a period of 3 months (February-April
2016), resulting in 4,030,755 sessions.
In Figure 2 we can see a histogram for the session length data.
For confidentiality reasons the x-axis has been normalized to 1000
bins. The distribution is highly skewed to the right, with a very
small number of sessions going all the way up to the cutoff.

WEIBULL ANALYSIS OF SESSION LENGTH

In this section we perform an analysis of the session length distribution for users in our sample. We provide a brief introduction into
Weibull analysis then move on to the results and discussion.

3.1

2
1

Survival analysis and prediction of dwell time has come into focus
recently, with many studies using it as a proxy of user satisfaction
in search and ad click scenarios. One of the first studies using the
Weibull distribution analyzed the dwell time of users visiting web
sites after performing a search [9]. The study indicated a strong
“negative aging” effect for websites visited after a search , i.e. the
probability of abandoning a page decreased with increasing dwell
time (see Sec. 3.1).
The distribution of dwell time can also be used to measure and
improve the satisfaction of users with search results [7]. In this
study, the authors segment the results according to attributes like
“readability level” and model the distribution of dwell time for each
segment. Their findings include that the dwell time distributions
for satisfied and dissatisfied clicks differ, and that it is possible to
use characteristics of these distributions to better predict satisfied
clicks.
Finally, predicted dwell time has also been used to improve the
ranking of ads [1, 8]. The predicted dwell time is incorporated into
an “ad-quality” model, which may include other aspects of an ad
and a user, summarized as the probability of a user clicking on an
ad. The authors develop predictive models and use features about
the user and ad landing page to estimate the dwell time and bounce
rate. They perform an evaluation on historical data and online
experiments to measure the effect that using the ad quality model
has on user engagement.

3

3

Weibull Distribution Review

The Weibull distribution is attractive for survival analysis because
it allows us to model different kinds of failure rates, when the
probability of failure changes over time. The probability density
function (PDF) of the distribution is:

3.3

Analysis of user session length distribution

For our analysis, we fit a Weibull distribution on the data of each
user using Maximum Likelihood Estimation with the fitdistrplus
R package [4].
In Figure 3 we can see the empirical cumulative distribution
for the shape parameter. We observe that the users in our sample
are split approximately down the middle, with 44% of the users
exhibiting Weibull distributions with k <= 1 and the rest k > 1.
Although not directly comparable, we note that for the dwell time
on web sites after a search, 98.5% of the web sites visited have dwell
time distributions with k < 1, exhibiting almost exclusively the
“negative aging” effect [9].

k  t  k −1 −(t /λ)k
e
,t ≥ 0
(1)
λ λ
The distribution has two parameters, k and λ, which correspond
to the shape and scale of the distribution. The shape, k, determines
how the elapsed time affects the rate of failure. The scale, λ, affects
the spread of the distribution: the larger it is, the more spread out
the distribution becomes.
f (t) =

978

Short Research Paper

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

1.2e+06

Table 1: Example user-based and contextual features used in
the models.

Count

1.0e+06
7.5e+05

Feature

Description

5.0e+05

Gender
Age
Subscription Status

The gender of the user
The age of the user
Whether the account is ad-supported

Device
Network
Previous duration
Absence time

The device used for the session
The type of network used for the session
The duration of the user’s last session
Time elapsed since the last session

2.5e+05
0.0e+00
0

250

500

750

1000

Normalized Duration

Figure 2: Histogram plot of session length. The x-axis has
been normalized to the 1-1000 range.

4.2

We selected gradient boosted trees (GBTs) [5] as our model for a
number of reasons: First, because our dataset contains missing data,
the algorithm we chose had to be able to handle them explicitly,
which decision trees do.
Second, the method should allow for proper modeling of nonnegative data. For such data it is possible to log-transform the
dependent and use a squared error objective, but using an objective
function that is better fitted to the distribution of the dependent
is often desirable, which is a common use-case for Generalized
Linear Models. GBTs provide a flexible optimization framework
that allowed us to do just that. To test both approaches, we first
log-transformed the dependent and used a root mean squared error
objective, then ran the same experiments again, this time selecting
the log-likelihood objective of a Gamma distribution with a log
link function, which allows for explicit modeling of right-skewed,
non-negative data. In Section 5 we refer to these models as linear
and Gamma respectively.
Finally, we tested two versions of each model. One aggregated
where a single model was created using the data of all the users,
and one per-user, where we separately trained one model per user,
using only the data originating from that user for the training and
testing. This meant that only contextual and not user-level features
could be used to train the per-user models. This way we tested the
trade-off between the statistical power that a large dataset provides
versus having personalized models.

Percentile

1.00
0.75
0.50
●

(1, 0.44)

0.25
0.00
0

1

2

3

4

Shape

Figure 3: The empirical cumulative distribution for the
shape parameter per user. The x axis has been truncated at
x = 4 for readability ( 99.5 % of data points shown).

One consideration we should note here is that the variability in
k could also be caused by sampling variability between users. We
aim to investigate this through hypothesis testing in an extended
version of this work.

4

PREDICTION

Apart from investigating the distribution of session length, ultimately we would like to be able to predict the length of a session.
To that end we gathered features about the users and sessions,
and treated the problem of predicting the length of a session as a
regression problem.

4.1

Model

5

EXPERIMENTS

The baseline model we tested against is the per-user mean session
length; that is, we calculated the mean session length in the training
set for each user, and used that value to make all predictions for
each session that user had in the test set. This gave us a baseline
that is simple, but personalized to account for the differences in
listening habits between users.
Because we are focusing on direct length prediction rather than
survival probability [1], thresholded duration classification [8], or
distribution parameter estimation [7, 9], most of the related work
models used in search and ad click scenarios are not directly applicable. Therefore we don’t include them in our comparison.
We used 10-fold cross validation, and stratified our sample per
user to ensure that every user had data points both in the train and
test set of each split.

Features

For each of the users and sessions available in our sample we collected a number of features. Some features, which we call “userbased” are features that we assume do not change between sessions,
for example the gender of a user. Other features which we call
“contextual” can change every time a user starts a new session, for
example the type of network or device that a user was using when
they started the session, or the length of their last session. We provide a summary of some of these features in Table 1, separated into
user-based and contextual features.

979

Short Research Paper

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Table 2: Performance metrics for length prediction task. We
report the mean value across the 10 CV folds, and the standard deviation in parentheses.
Method (Objective)

Normalized MAE

nRMSE

Baseline
Aggregated (Linear)
Aggregated (Gamma)
Per-user (Linear)
Per-user (Gamma)

1 (0.001)
0.71 (0.008)
0.93 (0.007)
0.83 (0.002)
0.86 (0.001)

1.16 (0.005)
1.23 (0.008)
1.10 (0.005)
1.29 (0.004)
1.31 (0.003)

data, but as a result miss many of the longer (outlier) sessions. This
causes their mean-based metrics to suffer, while median metrics
benefit.
We also see that the per-user models mostly perform worse than
their aggregated counterparts. This can be explained by the fact
that per-user models are mostly trained on few data points, and for
a flexible model like GBTs, they are likely to overfit. In this case
the trade-off between having a single model trained with all the
data versus having personalized models trained on each user’s data
favors the aggregated model.

6
To ensure that we have enough data points per user, we only
retained users that had at least 20 sessions recorded. The resulting
dataset had 3,563,544 sessions. Due to the size of the dataset we
chose to use the xgboost [3] variant of GBTs which is implemented
with scalability in mind, utilizing parallel, cache-aware, and outof-core computation to handle massive data sets. The parameters
for xgboost were selected through cross-validation on a separate
validation set.

5.1

Metrics

We chose two evaluation metrics to measure the performance of
our algorithms. The first was the Root Mean Square Error (RMSE),
which is a common choice for regression problems. In particular
we used the normalized variant of the measure (nRMSE), which is
simply the RMSE scaled by the mean value of the dependent, ȳ.
Large errors can be observed more often when the distribution
of the dependent variable is highly skewed as it is in our case (see
Figure 2). Therefore, we include the Median Absolute Error (MAE)
in our analysis due to its robustness to outliers. This way a few very
large errors will not affect the metric disproportionately, compared
to taking the mean. For confidentiality we normalize all the MAE
measurements by the baseline so that it has has an error of 1, and
lower measurements are better.

5.2

CONCLUSIONS

In this paper we perform the first, to the best of our knowledge,
analysis of session length in a mobile-focused online service. Our
analysis showed that the probability of a session to end evolves
differently for different users, with some exhibiting “negative aging“
and others “positive aging”. We also used a state of the art prediction algorithm to predict the length of a session based on user-level
and contextual features, and demonstrated the differences between
using a root mean squared error objective function and a Gamma regression objective that is more suited to right-skewed, non-negative
data such as session length.
In the future we aim to demonstrate the utility of session length
prediction, by using the predictions made by our model as input
to a recommender system, or an ad scheduling algorithm. We also
plan to improve our predictive models by incorporating features
whose values evolve during a session (like interactions with the
application), and keep a running estimate for the duration of a
session as it evolves.

REFERENCES
[1] N. Barbieri, F. Silvestri, and M. Lalmas. Improving post-click user engagement
on native ads via survival analysis. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on World Wide Web, WWW ’16, pages 761–770, Republic and Canton of
Geneva, Switzerland, 2016. International World Wide Web Conferences Steering
Committee.
[2] A. Borisov, I. Markov, M. de Rijke, and P. Serdyukov. A context-aware time model
for web search. In Proceedings of the 39th International ACM SIGIR Conference
on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, SIGIR ’16, pages 205–214,
New York, NY, USA, 2016. ACM.
[3] T. Chen and C. Guestrin. Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system. In Proceedings
of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining, KDD ’16, pages 785–794, New York, NY, USA, 2016. ACM.
[4] M. L. Delignette-Muller and C. Dutang. fitdistrplus: An R package for fitting
distributions. Journal of Statistical Software, 64(4):1–34, 2015.
[5] J. H. Friedman. Greedy function approximation: A gradient boosting machine.
The Annals of Statistics, 29(5):1189–1232, 2001.
[6] D. G. Goldstein, R. P. McAfee, and S. Suri. The cost of annoying ads. In Proceedings
of the 22nd International Conference on World Wide Web, WWW ’13, pages 459–
470, New York, NY, USA, 2013. ACM.
[7] Y. Kim, A. Hassan, R. W. White, and I. Zitouni. Modeling dwell time to predict
click-level satisfaction. In Proceedings of the 7th ACM International Conference
on Web Search and Data Mining, WSDM ’14, pages 193–202, New York, NY, USA,
2014. ACM.
[8] M. Lalmas, J. Lehmann, G. Shaked, F. Silvestri, and G. Tolomei. Promoting
positive post-click experience for in-stream Yahoo Gemini users. In Proceedings
of the 21st ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining, KDD ’15, pages 1929–1938, New York, NY, USA, 2015. ACM.
[9] C. Liu, R. W. White, and S. Dumais. Understanding web browsing behaviors
through Weibull analysis of dwell time. In Proceedings of the 33rd International
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval,
SIGIR ’10, pages 379–386, New York, NY, USA, 2010. ACM.
[10] M. Seshadri, S. Machiraju, A. Sridharan, J. Bolot, C. Faloutsos, and J. Leskovec.
Mobile call graphs: Beyond power-law and lognormal distributions. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery
and Data Mining, KDD ’08, pages 596–604, New York, NY, USA, 2008. ACM.

Results

We report the performance of the various approaches in Table 2. As
mentioned before, we refer to the models using the RMSE objective
as linear to avoid confusion with the nRMSE metric. The linear
aggregated model outperforms all models in terms of Median Absolute Error, but cannot beat the baseline on nRMSE. The aggregated
model using Gamma regression has the best performance in terms
of nRMSE, but has worse MAE than its linear counterpart. We note
that it’s the only model that beats the baseline in nRMSE.
The per-user linear models outperform the baseline for MAE but
not for nRMSE, similarly to the aggregated linear model. The peruser models using Gamma regression perform similarly to the linear
per-user models, indicating that the change in objective function
becomes less important in small data domains.
What these results indicate is that the aggregated model using
the Gamma regression objective is able to place the mean of the
distribution more accurately because it places more probability
mass in the right tail of the distribution. The linear models place
more of their probability mass closer to the origin, allowing them to
better capture the shorter sessions that are over-represented in the

980

