SIGIR 2010 Industry Track
Following the success of the SIGIR 2007 Industry Event and the SIGIR 2009 Industry Track, this year’s SIGIR
conference includes again an Industry Track during the regular conference program, and in parallel with the technical
tracks. The Industry Track’s objectives are twofold. The first objective is presenting the state-of-the-art in search,
delivered as keynote talks by influential technical leaders from the search industry. The second objective of the Industry
Track is the presentation of interesting, novel, and innovative ideas from the search industry.
Future Search: From Information Retrieval to Information Enabled Commerce: Invited keynote talk by William
Chang, Baidu. The China Economic Miracle has produced thirty years of sustained 10% GDP growth, allowing China
to overtake Japan. Recently, concerned with social issues, debt safety, high commodity prices and weak exports, China
has sought to tame that part of GDP derived from “real estate as securities” i.e. properties constructed for purpose of
trade instead of use. Instead, China has turned to exhorting with urgency domestic consumption, but the country lacks
many of the foundations of Information Enabled Commerce, contrastingly the epitome of American ingenuity and the
very source of America’s global competitive edge. We will survey some of these inventions for IEC from the viewpoint
of IR. We will also survey China’s demographic, social, cultural, and economic background and the role information
now plays in people’s daily lives, showcasing successful applications and business models that can suggest further
opportunities for IR and IEC. Although China’s 30-year development hasn’t really built many of the things that the
West takes for granted, people there are beginning to try: China’s emerging Internet commerce has already exceeded
1% of GDP and is expected to double this year.
Search Flavours - Recent Updates and Trends: Invited keynote talk by Yossi Matias, Google. This talk will discuss
some recent developments in Search, emerging in various shapes and forms. We will highlight some challenges, and
point to some search trends that play an increasing role in multiple domains.
Query Understanding at Bing: Invited keynote talk by Jan Pedersen, Bing. Web Search is a modern marvel because
it is able to produce very relevant results from relatively short queries evaluated over a vast database. Much of the
magic is due to query understanding; the technology that analyzes a user query and produces a suitable backend search
expression. This technology corrects common orthographic errors, expands terms to their semantically similar
equivalents, and groups terms into concepts. I will discuss the language models behind these technologies and their role
in canonical web search engine architecture.
Machine Learning in Search Quality at Yandex: Invited keynote talk by Ilya Segalovich, Yandex. This talk will
discuss the machine learning approach to search quality problems at Yandex, the largest search engine in Russian
Federation. We focus on a number of learning approaches that are vital in solving the large-scale IR problems, and
explore the capabilities and prospects of machine learning in search quality, as well as the problems that appear in
handling the real-world data sets based on our experiences at Yandex. We also describe Internet Mathematics 2009
contest which was organized by Yandex to stimulate research in the fields of data analysis and ranking methods.
Accepted Submission:
The new frontiers of Web search: going beyond the 10 blue links, Ricardo Baeza-Yates, Andrei Broder, Yoelle Maarek,
and Prabhakar Raghavan, Yahoo! Labs
Cross-Language Information Retrieval in the Legal Domain, Samir Abdou and Thomas Arni, Eurospider
Building and Configuring a Real-Time Indexing System, Garret Swart, Ravi Palakodety, Mohammad Faisal, Wesley
Lin, Oracle
Lessons and Challenges from Product Search, Daniel E. Rose, A9.com
Being Social: Research in Context-aware and Personalized Information Access @ Telefonica, Xavier Amatriain, Karen
Church and Josep M. Pujol, Telefónica
Searching and Finding in a Long Tail Marketplace, Neel Sundaresan, eBay
When No Clicks are Good News, Carlos Castillo, Aris Gionis, Ronny Lempel, and Yoelle Maarek, Yahoo! Research

David Harper

Peter Schäuble

Google
Organizer

Eurospider
Organizer

xxix

