Keynote Talk

Refactoring the Search Problem
Gary William Flake
Microsoft Corporation
Redmond, WA, USA
flake@microsoft.com

Abstract
The most common way of framing the search problem is as an exchange between a user and a
database, where the user issues queries and the database replies with results that satisfy constraints
imposed by the query but that also optimize some notion of relevance. There are several variations
to this basic model that augment the dialogue between humans and machines through query
refinement, relevance feedback, and other mechanism. However, rarely is this problem ever posed
in a way in which the properties of the client and server are fundamentally different and in a way in
which exploiting the differences can be used to yield substantially different experiences.
I propose a reframing of the basic search problem which presupposes that servers are scalable on
most dimensions but suffer from low communication latencies while clients have lower scalability
but support vastly richer user interactions because of lower communication latencies. Framed in
this manner, there is clear utility in refactoring the search problem so that user interactions are
processed fluidly by a client while the server is relegated to pre-computing the properties of a result
set that cannot be efficiently left to the client.
I will demonstrate Pivot, an experimental client application that allows the user to visually interact
with thousands of search results at once, while using facetted-based exploration in a zoomable
interface. I will argue that the evolving structure of the Web will tend to push all IR-based
applications in a similar direction, which has the algorithmic intelligence increasingly split between
clients and servers. Put another way, my claim is that future clients will be neither thin nor dumb.

Categories & Subject Descriptors:

H.1.2 [Models and Principles]: User/Machine
Systems-human information processing; H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval] Information
Search and Retrieval-Information filtering; H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]:
User Interfaces-Graphical user interfaces (GUI)

General Terms:

Algorithms, Performance, Design, Human Factors.

Bio
Dr. Gary William Flake is a Technical Fellow at Microsoft, where he focuses on Internet products
and technologies including search, advertising, content, portals, community, and application
development. In this capacity, he helps define and evolve Microsoft’s product vision, technical
architecture, and business strategy for online services. He is also the founder and director of Live
Labs, a “skunk works” team that bridges research and development. Prior to joining Microsoft, Dr.
Flake founded Yahoo! Research Labs, ran Yahoo!’s corporate R&D activities and company-wide
innovation effort, and was the Chief Science Officer of Overture – the company that invented the
paid search business model. Dr. Flake also wrote the award-winning book, The Computational
Beauty of Nature, which is used in college courses worldwide.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

250

