Personalizing Information Retrieval for Multi-Session
Tasks: The Roles of Task Stage and Task Type
Jingjing Liu, Nicholas J. Belkin

School of Communication and Information, Rutgers University
4 Huntington Street, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA

jingjing@eden.rutgers.edu, belkin@rutgers.edu
ABSTRACT

interactive IR; instead, it seems to differ significantly according to
different tasks [6]. White & Kelly [17] found that information
about tasks can be helpful in personalization, specifically, in
setting a threshold for predicting web pages’ relevance from dwell
time, in supporting implicit relevance feedback.

Dwell time as a user behavior has been found in previous studies
to be an unreliable predictor of document usefulness, with
contextual factors such as the user’s task needing to be considered
in its interpretation. Task stage has been shown to influence
search behaviors including usefulness judgments, as has task type.
This paper reports on an investigation of how task stage and task
type may help predict usefulness from the time that users spend on
retrieved documents, over the course of several information
seeking episodes. A 3-stage controlled experiment was conducted
with 24 participants, each coming 3 times to work on 3 sub-tasks
of a general task, couched either as “parallel” or “dependent” task
type. The full task was to write a report on the general topic, with
interim documents produced for each sub-task. Results show that
task stage can help in inferring document usefulness from
decision time, especially in the parallel task. The findings can be
used to increase accuracy in predicting document usefulness and
accordingly in personalizing search for multi-session tasks.

In everyday life, information search usually happens in a certain
scenario when people have a problem to solve, a goal to attain, or
a “work task” at hand [2][4]. It is often seen that a work task is
not accomplished in one session but requires multiple sessions for
various reasons, such as the complexity of the task, the difficulty
in locating desired information, time constraints, and so on. To
study how search personalization can be applied to multi-session
work tasks could result in helping people to address such tasks,
especially when these tasks are prolonged due to difficulties in
locating useful information.
In multi-session tasks, one task feature, task stage, seems to be
more salient than in single-session (especially quick and simple)
tasks. Task stage has been found to affect users’ search behaviors
and search performance (e.g., [7], [9]). Multi-session work tasks
are often complex and consist of multiple sub-tasks. Sub-task
interrelationship is another salient feature in multi-session work
tasks. For example, the subtasks can be independent of one
another (termed “parallel” in this paper), or they may need to be
performed in some hierarchical or serial order (termed
“dependent” in this paper) [13]. It is a pending issue whether
contextual factors of task stage and task type in multi-session
tasks can be helpful in implicitly predicting document usefulness,
which is a key to personalization. To this end, a longitudinal study
was conducted which was aimed at answering the following
research questions (RQs):

Categories and Subject Descriptors

H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search
and Retrieval – relevance feedback, search process

General Terms

Performance, Design, Human Factors.

Keywords

Personalization, contextual factors in IR, dwell time, task stage,
task type.

1. INTRODUCTION

Aimed at helping people find documents that meet their particular
information needs, personalization of information retrieval (IR)
takes account of information about users and their contexts
beyond the queries that they submit. This additional information
is often obtained implicitly from user behaviors and/or contextual
data, such as dwell time, topic knowledge, and task information
[1]. The time that a user spends on a retrieved document has
attracted some research attention in the areas of implicit feedback
and personalization of IR. It has been suggested that time alone is
not a reliable factor for predicting document relevance in

RQ1. Can the usefulness of retrieved documents be reliably
predicted solely from the time that users have spent on them?
RQ2. Does the stage of users’ tasks help predict the usefulness of
retrieved documents from the time that users have spent on them?
RQ3. If the stage information helps in predicting document
usefulness from time, does its role vary in different types of tasks?

2. RELATED LITERATURE
2.1 Task, Behavior, and Usefulness

Task has been found in previous research to be helpful in
predicting document usefulness by the user’s behavioral factors,
such as time spent on retrieved documents. Kelly & Belkin [6]
found that using display time averaged over a group of users to
predict document usefulness is not likely to be accurate, nor is it
accurate using display time for a single user without taking into
account contextual factors. Specifically, display time differs

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07...$10.00.

26

significantly according to specific tasks and specific users. This
demonstrated that inferring the usefulness of a document from
dwell time should be tailored towards individual tasks and/or
users. Their study, however, did not examine how to incorporate
the contextual factors and what the actual effectiveness would be.

stage are arbitrary to some extent, but the latter is closer to the
situation in people’s everyday life when solving complex tasks.

2.3 Task Type

There have been many studies on task type classification (e.g., [3],
[5], [8]), and Li & Belkin ([8]) have proposed an extensive
scheme to classify tasks based on many dimensions of task
features. Among the many task features, for work tasks which
consist of multiple sub-tasks, the relationship between the subtasks seems salient and it is necessary to take it into account
because the orders of sub-tasks may vary during the process of
accomplishing the work tasks. To our knowledge, no previous
research has classified multi-session tasks based on this
dimension, but similar ideas can be found in some works, for
example, Toms et al. [13] which classifies single-session tasks
based on their conceptual structures. The two types of tasks in
their approach are: the parallel task, where the search uses
multiple concepts that exist on the same level in a conceptual
hierarchy, and the hierarchical task, where the search uses a single
concept for which multiple attributes or characteristics are sought.

The issue of the influence of contextual factors was addressed by
White & Kelly [17]. They explored the interactions between dwell
time and two contextual factors: user and task. They examined if
additional information about the user and/or the task helps
reliably to establish a dwell time threshold to predict document
usefulness, and how effective this method would be. The results
showed that tailoring display time threshold based on task
information improved implicit relevance feedback algorithm
performance. In other words, display time was shown to be able to
successfully predict document usefulness when the task
information is considered. This research shed light on studying
the roles that other contextual factors may also play in helping
predicting document usefulness from user behaviors, including
the task features in multi-session tasks.

2.2 Task Stage

In sum, there is a relatively rich body of previous work on tasks,
but additional approaches are needed to better utilize the
information that a user’s task can provide to personalize search
for multi-session work tasks.

Task stage has received significant research attention in terms of
how it influences users’ search behavior and performance. It has
been suggested that information seekers go through various stages
or phases with different levels of information need (e.g., [7], [9],
[11]), and that users’ feelings, thoughts, and actions vary along
the different stages. This body of research indicates that stage of
task may be an important factor that relates to the user’s judgment
of document usefulness. Vakkari and colleagues (e.g., [14], [15],
[16]) found that users’ search tactics change along stages, for
example, their users were, at the beginning of their tasks, less
likely to start their initial queries by introducing all the search
terms, were more likely to enter only a fraction of the terms, and
tended to use more synonyms and parallel terms than in later
stages. They also found that users’ relevance criteria depend on
the stage of their task performance process, although their results
did not show a statistical significance of the changes. Taylor et al.
[12] found statistically significant relationships between users’
relevance criteria and task stage choices corresponding to those of
selection, exploration, formulation, and presentation in Kulthau’s
ISP model [7]. This branch of research demonstrates the
differences in users’ relevance judgments in different stages of the
task, however, it leaves as an open issue how such differences
could be modeled through the user’s behaviors. In addition, the
above described research considered only the effect of task stage
but did not correlate it with user behaviors to suggest how to build
user models and improve system support for search. More
research is needed to study how task stage can be helpful in
adapting search to different users.

3. METHOD
3.1 Study Design

The study was a 3-session controlled lab experiment, where the 3
sessions were treated as 3 stages. The design was 2*2 factorial
with two between-subjects factors (Table 1). One was task type,
with two levels: parallel or dependent. The other was search
system, with two levels: query suggestion (QS) or non-query
suggestion (NQS). These tasks and systems are described in more
detail below.
Table 1. Study design
System version
Session
Condition
Task
Session
Session
(stage)
(stage) 1
(stage) 2
3
1
Dependent
NQS
NQS
NQS
2
Parallel
NQS
NQS
NQS
3
Dependent
NQS
QS
QS
4
Parallel
NQS
QS
QS

3.2 Tasks

Tasks were designed to mimic journalists’ assignments since they
could be relatively easily set as realistic tasks in different
domains. Among the many dimensions of task types, e.g., in [8],
this study focused on task stage and sub-task interrelationship,
varying them while keeping other facets (e.g., task difficulty, task
product format) as constant as possible. Two tasks types were
used in the study: one parallel and one dependent. They both had
three sub-tasks, each of which was worked on by the participant
during one separate session, for three sessions in total.

It is not always easy to accurately identify task stages because
they do not always have apparent boundaries. One way is to
divide the logged user-system interaction data into three stages
with equal time length: “start”, “middle”, and “end” [18]. Another
way to operationalize task stage is provided by Lin [9], in which
the user’s task was manipulated with different sub-tasks to be
completed in different search sessions. The task scenario in his
study required participants to make a vacation plan through three
steps in three sessions: identifying candidate places, choosing one
place, and making a trip plan. Both ways to operationalize task

The tasks asked the participants to write a three-section feature
story on hybrid cars for a newspaper, and to finish and submit
each article section at the end of each experiment session. At the
end of the 3rd session, they were asked to integrate the 3 sections
into one article. In the dependent task, the three sub-tasks were: 1)

27

collect information on what manufacturers have hybrid cars; 2)
select three models that you will mainly focus on in this feature
story; and 3) compare the pros and cons of three models of hybrid
cars. In the parallel task, the three sub-tasks were finding
information and writing a report on three models of cars from auto
manufacturers renown for good warranties and fair maintenance
costs: 1) Honda Civic hybrid; 2) Nissan Altima hybrid, and 3)
Toyota Camry hybrid. It was hypothesized that the sub-tasks in
the parallel task were independent of one another, but that in the
dependent task there would be perceived to be at least some
notional order. To maintain consistency, sub-task orders in task
description in both tasks were rotated and users were allowed to
choose whatever order of sub-task performance they preferred.

suggestion features for those assigned with the QS version system.
In the 3rd session, after the post-session general task
questionnaire, an exit interview asked them to reflect their overall
knowledge gain and to comment on the whole experiment.

3.5 Work Station and Logging

The experiment was conducted using a two-monitor workstation:
the main monitor was an eye-tracker in which the users searched
and worked on writing their reports; the 2nd monitor was a regular
monitor sitting beside the search monitor, which displayed the
online questionnaires and the task and sub-task descriptions.
Users’ eye movements were captured but are not reported here.
Logging software Morae (http://www.techsmith.com/morae.asp)
was used to record all the user-system interactions (such as mouse
and keyboard activities, window display) in the main monitor.

In each session, participants were allowed to work up to 40
minutes to write and submit their reports. They were allowed to
search freely on the Web for resources in report writing. For
logging purpose, users were allowed to keep only one Internet
Explorer (IE) window open and use back and forward buttons to
move between web pages.

3.6 Search Systems

One aspect of the study as a whole was aimed at exploring
whether query terms extracted from useful pages in previous
sessions were helpful for the users in their current search, and to
this end, two versions of the search system were designed. One
version (QS) offered query term suggestions based on previous
sessions; the other (NQS) did not. For those who were assigned to
the NQS condition, the regular IE was used throughout all three
sessions. For those who were assigned to the QS condition, the
regular IE was used in their first sessions, but a different interface
with query term suggestions was provided for the second and the
third sessions. This different interface (Figure 1) consisted of two
parts: the right side panel was the regular IE browser, and the user
could search the open Web through whatever search engine they
like; the left-side panel displayed a list of terms extracted from
their previous session(s) for the users to select and add to their
queries.

3.3 Participants

Undergraduate Journalism/Media Studies students were invited to
participate in the study via email to the student mailing list at the
Journalism/Media Studies undergraduate program in the authors’
school. The first 24 students who responded and eventually came
were study participants. Out of them, 21 were female and 3 were
male. Their mean age was 20.4 years. They self reported to have
an average of 8.4 years of online searching experience, and rated
their levels of expertise with searching as slightly above average
(M=5.38) (1=novice, 7=expert). Each of them came 3 times
within a 2-week period based on their schedule. Each was
assigned randomly to a task/system condition. After finishing all 3
sessions, each participant obtained $30 payment. To encourage
them to search in a serious manner, participants were told in the
beginning of the experiment that the top 6 who submitted the
most detailed reports would receive a bonus of $20.

3.4 Procedures

Participants came individually to a usability lab in the authors’
school to take part in the experiment. Upon arrival in the first
session, they completed a consent form and a background
questionnaire eliciting their demographic information and search
experience. They were then given the general work task to be
finished in the whole experiment. A pre-session task questionnaire
followed to collect their familiarity with the general task topic.
Then they were asked to pick one sub-task to work with in the
current session. A pre-session sub-task questionnaire followed to
collect their familiarity with the sub-task topic. Then they worked
with the subtask: searching for useful sources and writing reports.
After report submission, participants went through an evaluation
process in which they were asked to rate on a 7-point scale each
document that they had viewed, in the order of viewing them in
the actual search process, with respect to its usefulness to the
overall task. A post-session sub-task questionnaire and a postsession general task questionnaire were then administered to elicit
user perceptions on the difficulty of the task and sub-task, as well
as their satisfaction with their reports. This ended the first session.

Figure 1. Search interface for the QS condition

4. RESULTS
4.1 Three Types of Time

In the literature, time that users spend on a document or webpage
is generally called dwell time, or reading time, or display time, but
it is often not clear how this time users spent on documents was
defined, although all these different names of time seem to refer to
the same thing. In the current study, an examination of the data as
well as observation during the experiment showed that there were
different types, instead of a single type, of time period that users

In the 2nd and the 3rd sessions, participants went through the same
processes except for the consent form and background
questionnaire, as well as an instruction step on using query

28

Open a page

Webpage A

Dwell time a1

Other pages or windows

Webpage A

Dwell time a2

Close a page
Webpage A

Webpage A

Webpage A

Dwell time a3

Dwell time a4

Dwell time a5

Display time d2

Display time d1
Decision time b

Dwell time a
Display time d
Decision time b

Close a page

Re-open a page

Time line

Total dwell time = a1 + a2 + a3 + a4 + a5
Total display time = d1 + d2

Figure 2. Illustration of three types of times that a user spends on a retrieved document in a session
spent on documents. These types are first explained here before
other results are reported.
Dwell time (DwT) (denoted as a in Figure 2) is defined as
the time duration from each point when the user starts
reading a document to when the user leaves the document
(either closing the document or leaving it open and going to
other applications). Each dwell time is the time that a user
dwells on the document.
Display time (DisT) (denoted as d in Figure 2) refers to the
total duration of a document between when it is opened to
when it is closed. This is also the total time that the
document remains open, no matter if it is active, i.e., if the
user views it or not, after it is opened. It is possible that a
document was opened for multiple times in an experiment
session, making it possible to have multiple display times at
different points.

Figure 3-a. Distribution of tDisT in both tasks

Decision time (DecT) (denoted as b in Figure 2) in this study
is the first dwell time. When a document was opened for the
first time, the user looked at it and then left it to do
something else, e.g., either invoking some other application,
or leaving the document to do some other searching. This we
interpret as indicating that the user had made a decision on
the usefulness (being useful or not, or to use the document or
not) of the document. For example, going to an MS WORD
document and starting writing most likely meant that the web
page that the user just viewed was useful; leaving a web page
and going back to a search result page (to refine queries or
open another search result) perhaps meant that the page just
viewed was not useful. In defining decision time, we are not
concerned with the nature of the decision, but just with the
fact that a decision had been made.

Figure 3-b. Distribution of log(10) of tDisT in both tasks

At times, some documents were viewed and/or opened for
multiple times in a session. In such cases, total dwell time (tDwT)
was used in data analysis, which was the sum of the dwell time
that a user spent on a document each time it was viewed.
Similarly, total display time (tDisT) was also used in data
analysis, which was the sum of the total times that a document
was open. For the usefulness scores of the documents viewed
multiple times in a session, most of the time, the users gave the
same scores to the same document opened at multiple times. At
rare times they gave different scores, in which case the final rating
score was used in data analysis.

In order to explore the relationships between/among various
factors, including both the main effects and any possible
interaction effects, General Linear Model (GLM) tests were
conducted, where time was used as the dependent variable, and
stage and usefulness were used as factors. Examinations of
distributions of all three types of time revealed that they were far
from normally distributed, which was consistent with what has
been found in the literature (e.g., [6]). As an example, Figure 3-a
shows the distribution of tDisT in both tasks combined. Similarly
to what has been done in the literature, these times were
transformed by logarithm using a base of 10 in data analysis for

29

the relationships between/among factors. The transformed time
data were normally distributed, or close to normally distributed
(see the example in Figure 3-b for the distribution of transformed
tDisT), which improves the interpretability of GLM analyses.

between that in stages 1 and 2; for very useful documents, users
spent a long time deciding document usefulness in stage 1, but in
stage 2, they spent shorter decision time, and in stage 3, their
decision time was even shorter. It can be clearly seen that there is
no general rule that the longer the decision time, the more useful
the document. So decision time cannot reliably predict usefulness
without consideration of information about task stage.

Data were analyzed for both tasks combined as well as for each
task individually. The original usefulness scores were on a 7-point
scale for its appropriateness for collecting user assessment [10],
but this is too fine-grained for a system to differentiate, so the
scores were collapsed into groups in the analysis similarly to what
has been done in the literature (e.g., [17]). Collapsing was based
on the distribution of usefulness scores, where 1-2 was put into a
low useful group, 3-5 into a somewhat useful group, and 6-7 into
a very useful group. The three combined groups were rather
balanced in frequency.

4.3 Results in the Dependent Task

Relations among stage, usefulness, and time were also examined
in individual tasks. In the dependent task, it was found that
usefulness was the single significant factor contributing to tDisT
(p<.001), tDwT (p<.001), as well as DecT (p<.05). Stage did not
play a significant role contributing to any type of time.

4.3.1 Total Display Time

4.2 Results with Both Tasks Considered

Across all three stages, the longer a page was displayed in a
session, the more useful this page was (Figure 5-a). For all
documents, in general, the average page display time did not have
differences in the three stages.

4.2.1 Total Display Time

We first looked at the relations among factors of usefulness, time,
and stage when no task type information was taken into account,
i.e., when both tasks in general were considered. Results indicated
that (Table 2), when tDisT was used, both stage and usefulness
had a significant effect. There was also a significant interaction
effect between stage and usefulness (p<.05).

4.3.2 Total Dwell Time

As can be seen from Figure 5-b, across all three stages, the longer
the users dwelled on a page, the more useful this page was. For all
documents, in general, the average total dwell time did not have
differences in three stages. In fact, total dwell time in stage 2 and
that in stage 3 were almost identical.

As can be seen from Figure 4-a, across all three stages, the longer
a page was displayed in a session, the more useful this page was.
For all documents, in general, the average page display time was
longer in later stage(s) than in earlier stage(s). The interaction
effect between stage and usefulness was shown in the following
way: for not useful documents, they were displayed longer in
stages 1 and 3 than in stage 2; for somewhat useful documents,
the later the stages, the longer they were displayed; however, for
very useful documents, their display time was longer in stages 2
and 3 than that in stage 1.

4.3.3 Decision Time

When DecT was used, the findings were essentially the same as
those using tDisT or tDwT. Although Figure 5-c looks a bit
different from Figures 5-a and 5-b, there was no statistically
significant difference. Across all three stages, the longer the
decision time, the more useful the page was. For all documents,
the average decision time did not show differences in the three
stages.

4.2.2 Total Dwell Time

As can be seen in Table 2, when tDwt was used, usefulness
showed as the single main factor (p<.001), but stage did not.
Descriptively, as can be seen from Figure 4-b, across all three
stages, the longer a page was displayed in a session, the more
useful this page was. For all documents, in general, the average
page display time did not differ across stages, and in fact, total
dwell time in stages 2 and stage 3 were almost identical.

4.4 Results in the Parallel Task

In the parallel task, the patterns of relationships among time,
stage, and usefulness were similar to those obtained when both
tasks were examined together. In contrast, they were very different
to those obtained in the dependent task alone.

4.4.1 Total Display Time

4.2.3 Decision Time

When tDisT was used, usefulness had a significant effect (p<.001)
but stage did not. As can be seen from Figure 6-a, across all three
stages, the longer a page was displayed in a session, the more
useful this page was. For all documents, when their usefulness
levels are not differentiated, the average page display time did not
have differences in three stages.

When DecT was used, neither stage nor usefulness showed a
significant main effect, but the interaction between stage and
usefulness showed a significant effect (p<.01). Figure 4-c shows
that when stage information is not considered, users spent roughly
the same average decision time on documents with various
usefulness levels. For all documents, in general, the average
decision time did not vary in different stages. However, there was
an interaction effect between stage and usefulness, demonstrated
in the following way: for not useful documents, users spent longer
decision time in stages 1 and 3 but shorter decision time in stage
2; for somewhat useful documents, users spent short decision time
in stage 1, but much longer decision time in stage 2, and in stage
3, their decision time for somewhat useful documents was

4.4.2 Total Dwell Time

When tDwT was used, usefulness had a significant effect (p<.001)
but stage did not. As can be seen from Figure 6-b, across all three
stages, the longer the user dwelled on a page, the more useful this
page was. For all documents, when their usefulness levels are not
differentiated, the average total dwell time did not have
differences in the three stages.

30

Table 2. F and p values of factors
Both Tasks Combined

Dependent Task

Parallel Task

Time
Type

Stage

Usefulness

Stage*
Usefulness

Stage

Usefulness

Stage*
Usefulness

Stage

Usefulness

Stage*
Usefulness

tDisT

4.15(.016)

123.78(.000)

2.66(.032)

1.96(.142)

63.40
(.000)

1.91(.108)

2.40(.092)

61.11(.000)

1.39(.236)

tDwT

1.68(.187)

75.40(.000)

.82(.514)

1.29(.276)

35.23(.000)

.83(.507)

.48(.621)

40.78(.000)

.43(.791)

2.16(.116)
.33(.722)
(Those in bold were significant.)

3.62(.006)

.79(.454)

3.34(.036)

1.57(.180)

.45(.639)

.14(.869)

2.48(.043)

DecT

Legend for Figures 4, 5, & 6: Stage:

1.

2.

3.

4-a. Total Display Time (tDisT)
4-b. Total Dwell Time (tDwT)
4-c. Decision Time (DecT)
Figure 4. Relationship of time, usefulness, and stages in both tasks combined

5-a. Total Display Time (tDisT)
5-b. Total Dwell Time (tDwT)
5-c. Decision Time (DecT)
Figure 5. Relationship of time, usefulness, and stages in the dependent task

6-a. Total Display Time (tDisT)
6-b. Total Dwell Time (tDwT)
6-c. Decision Time (DecT)
Figure 6. Relationship of time, usefulness, and stages in the parallel task

31

the dependent tasks individually, but not in both tasks combined.
In contrast, DecT can only predict usefulness in the dependent
task. Considering the practical limitation that tDwT and tDisT can
be captured only at the end of the task session, if one is to use
time alone as a reliable predictor of usefulness to personalize for
the current session, only DecT is available and so one can only
make predictions for the dependent task.

4.4.3 Decision Time

When DecT was used, neither usefulness nor stage had a
significant effect, but their interaction did (p<.05) (Figure 6-c). In
stage 1, users spent the shortest decision time for medium useful
document and the longest decision time for very useful
documents. In stage 2, they spent shorter decision time on low
usefulness and very useful documents but longer decision time on
somewhat useful documents. In stage 3, they spent the shortest
time for very useful documents and the longest time for medium
useful documents. These results indicated that in the parallel task,
stage played a significant role contributing to DecT.

Time
Type

4.5 About System Versions

tDisT

There is a need to look at the possible effect of system version on
the above results since participants used 2 versions of the system.
It was found that compared with the participants who were
assigned to the NQS condition, those assigned to the QS
condition had less initial knowledge on task topics even before
they worked with their sub-tasks in session 1. Therefore, the 2
groups of users were not sampled from the same population,
which accordingly makes it inappropriate to conduct any
comparison between these 2 groups of users with respect to
system performance. This also suggests that we need to treat all
participants as a whole instead of examining each group
independently for analyses on the effect of task stage and task
type. In addition, it was found that system condition did not seem
to confound the relationships discovered because it did not have a
significant main effect on users’ decision time, nor did it have a
significant interaction effect with usefulness on decision time.

tDw
T

Table 3. Summary of usefulness predictors
Role as
Applicable Task
Predictor
Type
Applicable
of
Sessions
Both Depd. Para.
usefulness
Single
√
√
√
Following
With stage
√
Following
Single

√

√

√

Following

Single
√
Current/following
With stage
√
√
Current/following
(Note: Depd.: dependent task; Para.: parallel task)

DecT

5.3 Stage as a Helpful Contextual Factor in
Predicting Usefulness

Although in the dependent task, stage did not seem to play a role
in contributing to use of any of the three types of time, in the
parallel task and in both tasks together, stage was found to have
significant main or interaction effects. Specifically, in both tasks
combined, stage had a significant main effect as well as a
significant interaction effect with usefulness on tDisT. Stage also
had a significant interaction effect with usefulness on DecT. In the
parallel task, stage had a significant interaction effect with
usefulness on DecT.

5. DISCUSSION
5.1 Usefulness of Three Types of Time

Task stage plays a role in predicting usefulness from tDisT in both
tasks combined. This role can be used for subsequent search/work
sessions but it cannot be applied to the ongoing session due to the
limitation that tDisT cannot be captured until the end of a session.
However, the role that task stage plays in predicting usefulness
from DecT can be applied to the ongoing session. The significant
interaction effects between stage and usefulness on DecT in both
tasks combined and in the parallel task are important because in
these tasks, usefulness in fact did not have any main effect. This
indicates that in both tasks combined and in the parallel task,
DecT alone cannot predict usefulness, but by taking into account
task stage information, it can. However, it should also be noted
that although the above mentioned interaction effects between
stage and usefulness were significant, the effect size was not large
(partial eta squared was .015 in both tasks combined and .022 in
the parallel task).

Among the three types of time, tDisT and tDwT both measured
time at the whole session level. These times cannot be captured
until a session is finished, so their applicability for personalizing
search for the current session is limited. They may be nonetheless
useful as a basis for personalizing subsequent search sessions. On
the other hand, DecT can be captured in a much earlier phase in a
session; therefore, it can be used for adapting search in the current
session in addition to subsequent sessions, making it more useful
for immediate personalization than the other two types of time.

5.2 Time as a Predictor of Usefulness

Results showed that in both tasks combined, i.e., when task type
was not distinguished, usefulness had a significant main effect on
tDwT. This is reasonable given the fact that the users often moved
back and forth between reading documents and writing reports,
and those documents which had longer dwell time were more
likely to be useful. This finding indicates that when task type was
not distinguished, tDwT was a rather reliable predictor of
usefulness. However, when tDisT or DecT was used, neither of
them seemed able to reliably predict usefulness.

In sum, when no task type was distinguished, task stage was found
to help in predicting usefulness from tDisT, which can be used for
personalization in subsequent work/search sessions in a multisession task. When no task type was distinguished, or in the
parallel task, task stage was found to be an important factor to
take account of when predicting usefulness from DecT, which can
be used for personalizing search for the ongoing session.

In the dependent task, all three types of time, tDisT, tDwT, and
DecT, appeared to be able to reliably predict usefulness. In
contrast, in the parallel task, tDisT and tDwT were shown to be
able to reliably predict usefulness, but DecT was not.

These findings are helpful for personalizing search for specific
users in that decision time can help predict the usefulness of
documents given the task stage and task type information. In
addition, unlike the tDwT which would not be available until a

In sum, tDwT was shown to be able to reliably predict usefulness
in both tasks combined, and for both the parallel and the
dependent task. tDisT can predict usefulness in the parallel and

32

7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

session is over, DecT can be easily obtained in an early phase of a
session.

This research is sponsored by IMLS grant LG#06-07-0105. We
thank the reviewers for their insightful comments.

5.4 Task Type as a Helpful Contextual Factor
in Predicting Usefulness

8. REFERENCES

Our results show that in the dependent task, task stage did not
play a role in predicting document usefulness, but in the parallel
task, it did. A likely explanation is that in the dependent task, subtasks that the users worked with in the three sessions were
different not only in their topics, but also in the sub-task patterns.
However, in the parallel task, sub-tasks that the users worked on
in the three sessions differed only in their topics; they had the
same sub-task patterns, and users only changed car models across
sessions. This made it possible for users to gain knowledge across
stages regarding the usefulness of some documents. Therefore,
their decision time on useful documents in later stages was
shorter, while in the dependent task, it was still long.

[1] Belkin, N.J. (2008). Some(What) grand challenges for

information retrieval. ACM SIGIR Forum 42, 1, 47-54.

[2] Byström, K., & Järvelin, K. (1995). Task complexity affects

information seeking and use. Inform Process Manag, 31, 191213.

[3] Freund (2008). Exploring task-document relations in support of
information retrieval in the workplace. Unpublished
Dissertation. University of Toronto.

[4] Ingwersen, P. & Järvelin , K. (2005). The turn: Integration of
information seeking and retrieval in context. Springer-Verlag
New York, Inc. Secaucus, NJ, USA.

When task information was not specified, stage also played a role.
This is due, we think, to the strong role of task stage in the
parallel task. Although inferring document usefulness based on
time and stage still works while ignoring task type, it will enhance
the prediction accuracy by considering this task type information.

[5] Kellar, M., Watters, C., & Shepherd, M. (2007). A field study

5.5 Further Studies

[7] Kuhlthau, C.C. (1991). Inside the search process: information

characterizing Web-based information-seeking tasks. J. Am.
Soc. Inf. Sci. Tec., 58(7), 999-1018.

[6] Kelly, D. & Belkin, N.J. (2004). Display time as implicit

feedback: Understanding task effects. Proc. SIGIR, 377-384.
seeking from the user’s perspective. J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci., 42,
361-371.

The findings reported here are only about examination of the role
of task stage in multi-session tasks in personalization. There are
certainly other factors that may also play significant roles in
usefulness prediction, for example, users’ knowledge of the task
topics. This was elicited in the experiment and will be analyzed in
future studies. Also, it would also be interesting to examine the
2nd, the 3rd, and more dwell times besides the 1st dwell time (i.e.,
DecT) with respect to how they can be used for personalization.
In addition, the results in this paper showed that task stage is an
important contextual factor to be considered in predicting
usefulness from time. Nevertheless, more work is needed to
estimate the extent that task stage can help. Further studies will
also design and build systems that automatically personalize
search based on time threshold and stage information.

[8] Li, Y. & Belkin, N.J. (2008). A faceted approach to

conceptualizing tasks in information seeking. Inform Process
Manag, 44, 1822-1837.

[9] Lin, S.-J. (2001). Modeling and Supporting Multiple

Information Seeking Episodes over the Web. Unpublished
dissertation. Rutgers University.

[10] Tang, R., Shaw, W.M., & Vevea, J.L. (1999). Towards the

identification of the optimal number of relevance categories. J.
Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Tec, 50(3), 254-264.

[11] Taylor, R.S. (1968). Question negotiation and information

seeking in libraries. College & Research Libraries, 29, 178-194.

[12] Taylor, A. R., Cool, C., Belkin, N.J., & Amadio, W.J. (2007).

Relationships between categories of relevance criteria and stage
in task completion. Inform Process Manag 43, 1071-1084.

6. CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we examined the relationships among task stage,
task type, document usefulness, and three types of time. Decision
time can be used for personalizing search for an ongoing session
as well as for subsequent sessions. It was found that in the parallel
task, one needs to take account of task stage in order to accurately
predict usefulness from decision time. However, this is not the
case with the dependent task. This suggests that it is important to
be able to identify task type in addition to task stage in order to
predict document usefulness based on decision time. Total display
time and total dwell time can be used for personalizing search for
subsequent sessions in multi-session tasks. Either of them alone
appears to be a reliable indicator of document usefulness, and task
stage and task type information does not necessarily need to be
considered. While these findings can only be generalized to the
task types and task stages as defined in this paper, they suggest
that there may be similar results when considering other task
types, and other definitions of task stage.

[13] Toms, E., MacKenzie, T., Jordan, C., O’Brien, H., Freund, L.,

Toze, S., et al. (2007). How task affects information search. In
Workshop Pre-proceedings in Initiative for the Evaluation of
XML Retrieval (INEX), 337-341.

[14] Vakkari, P., & Hakala, N. (2000). Changes in relevance criteria

and problem stages in task performance. J. Doc. 56(5), 540-562.

[15] Vakkari, P., Pennanen, M., & Serola, S. (2003). Changes of

search terms and tactics while writing a research proposal: A
longitudinal research. Inform Process Manag, 39, 445-463.

[16] Vakkari, P. H., N. (2000). Changes in relevance criteria and

problem stages in task performance. J. Doc., 56(5), 540-562.

[17] White, R., & Kelly, D. (2006). A study of the effects of

personalization and task information on implicit feedback
performance. Proc. CIKM, 297-306.

[18] White, R.W., Ruthven, I., & Jose, J.M. (2005). A study of

factors affecting the utility of implicit relevance feedback. Proc.
SIGIR, 35-42.

33

