The Good, the Bad, and the Random:
An Eye-Tracking Study of Ad Quality in Web Search
Georg Buscher

Susan Dumais

Edward Cutrell

DFKI
Knowledge Management Dept.
Kaiserslautern, 67663, Germany

Microsoft Research
One Microsoft Way
Redmond, WA 98052 USA

Microsoft Research India
196/36 2nd Main, Sadashivnagar
Bangalore, 560 080, India

georg.buscher@dfki.de

sdumais@microsoft.com

cutrell@microsoft.com

ABSTRACT
We investigate how people interact with Web search engine result
pages using eye-tracking. While previous research has focused on
the visual attention devoted to the 10 organic search results, this
paper examines other components of contemporary search
engines, such as ads and related searches. We systematically
varied the type of task (informational or navigational), the quality
of the ads (relevant or irrelevant to the query), and the sequence in
which ads of different quality were presented. We measured the
effects of these variables on the distribution of visual attention and
on task performance. Our results show significant effects of each
variable. The amount of visual attention that people devote to
organic results depends on both task type and ad quality. The
amount of visual attention that people devote to ads depends on
their quality, but not the type of task. Interestingly, the sequence
and predictability of ad quality is also an important factor in
determining how much people attend to ads. When the quality of
ads varied randomly from task to task, people paid little attention
to the ads, even when they were good. These results further our
understanding of how attention devoted to search results is
influenced by other page elements, and how previous search
experiences influence how people attend to the current page.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.1.2 [Models and Principles] User/Machine Systems – Human
information processing, Human factors .

General Terms
Design, Experimentation, Human Factors, Measurement.

Figure 1: Gaze heat map on a search engine results page.

Keywords

distributions on SERPs, such as the “golden triangle” [12] or the
“F-shaped pattern” [18]. Figure 1 shows an example of a
characteristic heat map for a SERP. These studies tend to be fairly
high-level, with qualitative descriptions aggregated across many
different pages or tasks. Other researchers have taken a more
controlled experimental approach and reported quantitative
summaries of eye movements on SERPs, often explicitly
controlling users’ tasks. These studies characterized how visual
attention is distributed on the 10 organic results, e.g., [6], [9],
[10], [16]. However, all of today’s major commercial search
engines include additional elements on a SERP such as sponsored
links at the top and on the right rail, related searches, graphical
elements such as maps, illustrations, or other content. In this
study we seek to understand how the visual attention devoted to
organic results is influenced by these other page elements.

Gaze tracking, user study, search engine results pages

1. INTRODUCTION
In designing effective search systems, it is important to
understand how people search and interact with the information
presented on search engine result pages (SERPs). In this paper we
use an eye-tracking study to increase our understanding of the
processes that people use in examining result pages, and of
variables that influence these processes.
Previous studies have used eye-tracking to understand how people
attend to and interact with different elements of SERPs. This work
has developed well-known terms to describe typical gaze
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise,
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior
specific permission and/or a fee.
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07...$10.00.

Sponsored links are an especially important component of the
SERP since they form the main source of income for search
engines. Depending on the search intent of the user, ads may
provide valuable information and lead searchers directly to their
goal. In contrast, if ads are off-topic or simply not relevant to the

42

immediate goal, they run the risk of annoying or distracting users,
perhaps even impeding completion of their search.
The main goal of this paper is to study factors that might influence
how users distribute their visual attention on different components
on a SERP during Web search tasks. While we examine visual
attention on most components typically present on a SERP, we are
especially interested in sponsored links. Applying eye-tracking
techniques, we determine basic differences in gaze distribution
due to ad quality and task type. In addition we examine the effects
of the sequence in which ads of good or poor quality are
presented. Sequence effects reflect how prior search experiences
influence behavior on the current search task.
After presenting an overview of related research, we describe the
experimental design for our eye-tracking study. We then provide
an analysis and a discussion of factors influencing the visual
attention to SERP components, with special attention to sponsored
links. We conclude with a summary of the implications of the
results and some directions for future research.

Aula et al. [1] find two different types of searchers exhaustive and
economic searchers. Exhaustive searchers examine a SERP
thoroughly and look up and down the SERP several times before
choosing a result entry to click on. In contrast, economic users
sequentially look from the top to the bottom and click on the first
relevant result entry they notice (see also [9]).

2.3 The Influence of Ads
The previously mentioned eye-tracking studies focus on eye
movement behavior on the 10 organic results. However, SERPs
typically contain many additional elements including sponsored
links, spell suggestions, related queries, rich snippets, etc. Yet
there is very little research about the influence of these
components on the search behavior and success.
Most of the available research work focuses on sponsored links,
which can account for 10% to 23% of all links presented on a
SERP [11], depending on the search engine and query. Fallows
[8] reports that in 2005 only 38% of searchers were aware of the
concept of sponsored links at all, and only 12% could reliably
differentiate between sponsored links and organic results.
Jansen et al. [14] analyze factors relating to clicks on sponsored
links. They conducted a study in which participants had to interact
with SERPs that had 10 organic results and some textual ads on
the right side. They find that 51% of the users only look at organic
results and completely ignore the ads. (However, this was
determined with think-aloud techniques rather than eye tracking.)
In addition, users typically examine ads if they do not find an
answer to their task on the initially viewed organic results. In
general, they report a considerable bias against ads, even when
controlling for their quality.
Interestingly, Jansen [13] finds that summary snippets of ads
presented by commercial Web search engines are usually as
relevant as summaries of organic results. Further, Jansen & Spink
[15] report that seamlessly integrating ads with the organic results
(i.e., making a differentiation between them impossible) does not
increase their click-through rate. Finally, as shown by Yan et al.
[25] behavioral targeting of ads can drastically improve clickthrough rates.
In summary, search behavior is influenced by individual user
characteristics, the type of search task at hand, and the relevance
of the search results. We extend this work by analyzing visual
attention to the full range of elements in contemporary SERPs.
We also systematically vary and examine the effects of ad quality.
Finally, we study the dynamics of user attention and behavior by
varying the order in which ads of different quality are presented.

2. RELATED WORK
2.1 Web Search Behavior in General
Several factors including the quality of the results and their
presentation, the type of search task, and individual differences
have been shown to influence search behaviors and success.
Search interactions are influenced by the quality of the search
results, although the relationships are often weak when measured
using total time or overall search success [22]. Similarly, Smith &
Kantor [21] find that the search success is the same for both good
and degraded systems, but that users alter their strategies
depending on the quality of the results.
In the context of Web search, Broder [2] and Rose & Levinson
[20] describe three general classes of user goals informational,
navigational and resource or transactional. These different search
goals lead to different search success, with users being faster and
more successful for navigational tasks in general [6], [9]. The
influence of query frequency and the popularity of search goals
have also been analyzed by Downey et al. [7]. They find that
searchers are more successful for common queries and common
goals, and also if the frequency of the query matches the
frequency of the user’s information need. In addition, caption
features such as the occurrence of query terms in the title of a
result entry significantly influence whether searchers choose to
view a result [5].
There is a large body of work on individual differences in search
behavior. White and colleagues summarize this work and report
findings from large-scale log studies in which they find that
search experts [24] and domain experts [23] are more successful
and employ different search strategies than novices.

3. METHODS
We use eye-tracking as an instrument to provide detailed
information about the user’s visual attention. It is common for
eye-tracking studies to take gaze position as a proxy for visual
attention. Thus, gaze tracking can provide data leading to valuable
insights about search strategies and processes.

2.2 Eye Tracking on SERPs
Previous research has used eye-tracking studies to understand in
detail how searchers examine search results.
Joachims et al. [16] show that the way in which searchers examine
a SERP is influenced by the position and relevance of the results.
Searchers have a strong bias towards result entries at higher
positions on the SERP. Pan et al. [19] and Guan & Cutrell [10]
have also reported similar findings.
Cutrell & Guan [6] look in more detail at how eye movements are
influenced by the snippets for search results. They find that longer
snippets lead to better search performance for informational tasks,
but degrade performance for navigational tasks.

3.1 Experimental Design and Procedure
We designed an eye-tracking experiment in which participants
had to complete a number of given search tasks using a Web
search engine. We were interested in effects of:
- task type (i.e., informational or navigational),
- elements on search engine results pages (SERPs), most
importantly the quality of the ads, and
- the order in which SERPs containing ads of good or bad
quality were presented to a participant.

43

Table 1: Examples of task descriptions and initial queries
used for the study.
Task Description

Task
Type
Info

southwest
special offers
las vegas casino
venetian
bellagio las
vegas rooms
ibuprofen side
effects
nike shoes

Nav
Nav

Related
searches

Info

(optional)

5 right
rail ads

Info
Nav

…

How much optical zoom does the
compact digital camera Sony
Cyber-Shot W230 have?
Find the special offers page for
Southwest Airlines.
Find the official Web site of the
Venetian casino in Las Vegas.
How many guest rooms does the
Bellagio hotel in Las Vegas have?
What are some side-effects of
Ibuprofen?
Go to NikeStore on the official
Nike homepage.

Initial Task
Query
sony cyber shot
W230

Upper
search
box
3 top ads

Tasks
Every participant had to solve the same set of 32 search tasks.
Half of the tasks were navigational (i.e., they had to find a specific
Web page) and half were informational (i.e., they had to find
factual information). All of the tasks were of a commercial nature
so that ads would be a realistic component of the SERPs.

10 organic
results

Pagination
Lower search
box
Figure 2: SERP layout
Ad Quality

Each task had a description telling the participants what they
should look for. In order to make the initial SERP comparable
across participants, we provided them with an initial query for
each task. Some examples of task descriptions and the
corresponding initial task queries are given in Table 1.

In the study, each SERP contained 3 ads at the top and 5 ads on
the right rail (see Figure 2). For each SERP, all of the displayed
ads were either of good or of bad quality. Figure 3 shows an
example of 3 good quality and 3 bad quality ads for the query
“Ibuprofen side effects”. Across participants, each task was shown
equally often with good quality ads or bad quality ads.

We cached results for each initial query. This allowed us to have a
consistent initial set of results for each task which we knew
included a solution to the task in a fixed position. For 24 (75%) of
the tasks, the static first SERP contained a solution within the top
3 organic results, for 6 tasks (19%), a solution could be found in
positions 4-6, and for 2 tasks (6%), a solution was after position 6.

The good ads were selected from the ads shown by commercial
Web search engines such as Bing, Google, and Yahoo! in
response to the initial task queries. The bad ads were selected
from the same commercial Web search engines by generating
queries using a subset of the terms occurring in the initial task
queries. This matching method is responsible for some types of
bad matches observed in practice. Since the bad ads were
generated from query terms, they contained highlighted terms
making them visually similar to the good ads. For the
determination of good and bad ads we only consider topicality,
but no other factors such as the reputation of the sponsor, etc.

After the initial SERP was presented, participants were free to
proceed as they wished. They could click links, view the next
page of results, or re-query. The combination of an initial fixed
SERP and full search functionality provides a good balance
between experimental control and search realism for a laboratory
study.
Initial
task
query

SERP Elements and SERP Generation
The layout of the SERPs was modeled after a commercial Web
search engine. As depicted in Figure 2, a SERP contained the
following important elements

Good
quality
ads

- an upper and lower search box,
- 10 organic results (not containing any special elements like
maps, videos, images, or deep links),
- 3 top ads,
- 5 right rail ads, and
- related searches on the left rail for queries for which they were
available (20 of the 32 initial queries contained related
searches).

Bad
quality
ads

To generate the SERP for a query, we implemented our own
search interface shown in Figure 2. For the initial task query the
interface showed a locally cached version of the first SERP for the
query. For any other user-generated query, the interface queried a
commercial Web search engine in the background, took the

Figure 3: Example of good and bad quality ads for the same
initial task query.

44

23
26
19
9
6
14
11
5
20
10
12
21
30
27
15
16
24
32
1
7
9
28
4
17
22
8
31
2
18
13
25
2

Summary of Independent Variables

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32

Task number
Trial number

To summarize, the main independent variables for each trial were

Condition: GB
Ad quality gbgggggg bgbbbbbb gbgggggg bgbbbbbb
Block
G
B
G
B
Condition: BG
Ad quality bgbbbbbb gbgggggg bgbbbbbb gbgggggg
Block
B
G
B
G
Condition: RR
Ad quality gbbgggbb bgbbgbgg gbbggbbg gbgbbgbg
Block
R
R
R
R

-

Task type (informational/navigational)
Quality of the ads (good/bad) shown on the SERPs
Block (G/B/R) the trial belongs to
Condition (GB/BG/RR) the participant was assigned to

Procedure
After a short introduction to the study, the eye tracker was
calibrated using a 5 point calibration. Then, the participants
started with one practice task to illustrate the procedure and
continued in the same way for the remaining 32 tasks.

Figure 4: Experimental variables. Each sequence of randomly
assigned tasks is performed in 1 of 3 conditions (BG, GB, RR).
The sequence conditions determine when the SERPs contain
good (g) or bad (b) quality ads.

For each task, we provided the participants with a written task
description and the corresponding initial query. After reading the
description and the query aloud, the participants pressed a search
button to begin searching using the initial query. The first SERP
was always the locally stored, static page containing ads of the
appropriate quality for that trial. From here on, participants were
free to interact with search results. To solve the task, they had to
navigate to an appropriate Web page and point out the solution on
it to the experimenter. After finding a solution, they had to answer
the question “How good was the search engine for this task?” (5point Likert scale).

organic results and the related searches (if any), inserted ads, and
displayed them using our modified interface layout.
For each task, we had a pool of good quality and of bad quality
ads. The static first SERPs for the initial task queries always
contained the same ads from the appropriate pool. For subsequent
queries, ads from the appropriate pool were randomly selected and
integrated into the SERP at runtime.

After completing the example task and all 32 main tasks like this,
the participants had to fill in a study questionnaire asking about
their Web search experience and practices during the study and in
general. The experiment took about one hour per participant.

Trial Sequences
To study sequence effects, we controlled the order in which
SERPs with good or bad ad quality appeared within the sequence
of 32 tasks. In the following, we introduce some terminology for
describing how the task sequences were created (see Figure 4).

3.2 Apparatus
The experiment was performed on a 17” LCD monitor (96 dpi) at
a screen resolution of 1280x1024 pixels. We used the browser
Internet Explorer 7 with a window size of 1040x996 pixels. With
this setting, the page fold was usually between the organic results
at positions 6 and 7. For gaze tracking, we applied a Tobii x50 eye
tracker which has a tracking frequency of 50 Hz and an accuracy
of 0.5° of visual angle. Logging of click and gaze data was done
by the software Tobii Studio.

A trial is one unit of the experiment starting from reading the task
description until completing the task. There were 32 trials in an
experiment, one trial for each task. For each trial, we specified
which task to solve and whether to show only good or only bad
quality ads on the SERPs for that task.
The experiment was divided into 4 blocks, of eight consecutive
trails. There are three types of blocks - Good (G), Bad (B) or
Random (R). A good quality block (G) contains 8 trials with
mostly good ad quality, whereas a bad quality block (B) contains
8 trials with mostly bad ad quality. To make the blocking effect
less obvious to the participants, the ad quality in the second trial
of each G or B block is reversed. In Figure 4, a lower case g or b
is used to delineate a trial containing only good (g) or only bad (b)
ads. Random blocks (R) consist of half good and half bad ad
quality trials (randomly distributed within an R block). The only
constraint on the random selection was that, across all
participants, each task should be performed using good quality ads
around the same number of times as using bad quality ads. For all
trials in all conditions, all of the ads displayed on a SERP were
either of good (g) or of bad (b) quality.

3.3 Participants
Thirty-eight participants produced valid eye-tracking data (out of
41). Participants were recruited from a user study pool. They
ranged in age between 26 and 60 years (mean = 45.5, σ = 8.2),
and had a wide variety of backgrounds and professions. 21
participants were female and 17 were male.
For the 38 participants, we generated 13 unique task sequences.
13 participants were assigned to the GB condition, 13 to BG, and
12 to RR. Overall, we got valid eye-tracking data for 1210 trials.

3.4 Measures
For our analysis, we wanted to know how visual attention and
clicks are distributed among different elements of the SERP.
Therefore, we assigned gaze and click data to areas of interest
(AOIs) on the SERPs.

Each participant was assigned to one of 3 conditions GB, BG, or
RR. Each condition contains 4 blocks of trials GBGB, BGBG, and
RRRR, respectively (see Figure 4). Thus every participant
performed 16 tasks with SERPs showing good quality ads and 16
tasks with SERPs showing bad quality ads.

AOIs
Since all SERPs presented during the study had the same kinds of
elements, we created common areas of interest. All regions
labeled in Figure 2 were defined as AOIs. For the top ads, the
right rail ads, and the organic results, we introduced further AOIs
matching the different result entries (i.e., separate AOIs for each
of the 10 organic results, for the 3 top ads and for the 5 right rail
ads). In addition, each of those result entries contained 3 AOIs
matching the title, the summary text snippet, and the URL.

The order of the tasks in a 32 trials sequence was randomly
assigned. Each unique task sequence was performed in all 3
conditions by 3 different participants. It is important to note that
the participants saw 32 trials without any special delineation of
the block structure or the quality of the ads. The blocks and
presentation conditions are for analysis purposes.

45

Figure 5: Mean fixation impact on SERP elements in
milliseconds (including standard errors of the mean).

Figure 6: Percentage of visual attention and of clicks attracted
by different AOIs.

Fixation Impact fi(A)

over all 38 participants and all 32 trials. (It should be noted that
the specific SERP in the background of the figure is just an
example to show gaze relative to AOIs.) The figure shows the
well-known gaze distribution referred to as “golden triangle” [12]
or “F-shaped pattern” [18], describing where people allocate their
visual attention on SERPs in the aggregate.

Fixations were detected using built-in algorithms of Tobii Studio.
The algorithms generate a fixation if recorded gaze locations of at
least 100ms are close to each other (radius 35 pixels).
We used the measure fixation impact fi(A) to determine the
amount of gaze an AOI A received. This measure was introduced
by Buscher et al. [4] and is a modified version of simple fixation
duration. Fixation duration assigns the entire duration to the
AOI(s) that contain the center point of the fixation, but the
fixation impact measure spreads the duration to all AOI(s) close to
the fixation center using a Gaussian distribution. Thus, fixation
impact prorates the duration of a fixation to all AOIs that are
projected on the foveal area of the eyes.

Figure 5 shows mean fixation impact on the different SERP
components averaged across participants and across trials. Not
surprisingly, most visual attention was devoted to the top few
organic results. Interestingly, however, the top ads received as
much attention as results around the fold (at positions 6-7). In
Figure 6 we show the percentage of visual attention AOIs
received from the participants along with the percentage of clicks
on the respective AOIs. Gaze and click patterns are in general
agreement, but there are some interesting differences. The organic
result entries at position 1, 2, and 3 together attracted only 53.46%
of visual attention on the SERPs, but 63.90% of all clicks. In
addition, the top ads received more than 10% of the visual
attention but fewer than 5% of the clicks.

Clicks c(A)
We also count the number of clicks on any links on the SERPs
(e.g., organic results, top and right rail ads, related searches, etc.).
c(A) specifies the number of clicks aggregated for the AOI A. For
example, for the AOI top_ads spanning all 3 top ads, c(top_ads)
would be the sum of clicks on any of the 3 top ads.

Discussion. Overall, our findings are in line with previous
research concerning the distribution of visual attention to organic
search results on SERPs [12], [18]. We further see that the relative
distribution of clicks does not always reflect the relative
distribution of visual attention (Figure 6). We find that there are
proportionally more clicks that attention on top results, which is
consistent with the previously reported bias towards selecting one
of the top organic results [16], [17].

Time on SERP t
Finally, for each participant and task, time on SERP t measures
the time the participant spent on the first static SERP for a given
task. This time includes all views of the first static SERP, not only
the time to first click.

4. RESULTS
For this analysis we focus on several aspects of gaze on SERPs.
First, we want to determine differences in visual attention (on
AOIs) with respect to task type. Second, we are interested in the
difference in visual attention on good and on bad quality ads on
SERPs. Third, we focus on sequence effects of presenting good or
bad ads in different orders.

Conversely, we find that top and right rail ads receive a higher
fraction of visual attention than of clicks. This extends previous
subjective reports of a bias against sponsored links [14]. In
addition, although each of the top ads got approximately as much
visual attention as organic results at the page fold (see Figure 5),
the top ads got considerably fewer clicks than organic result
entries even below the fold.

We concentrate our gaze-based analysis on the static first SERPs
for the initial queries we provided to the participants. Since the
same static first SERPs are viewed by each participant (either with
good or with bad quality ads displayed), we are confident that all
participants are looking at exactly the same information, and
comparability is ensured. Gaze on the first SERP represents 88%
of the total gaze on all SERPs, and 32% of total task time (with
the remainder of the time spent on reading Web pages).

4.2 Effects of Task Type
Figure 7 (left side) shows average fixation impact for SERP
elements, broken down separately for informational and
navigational tasks. There are several large differences of the
general gaze distribution with respect to task type.
First, the participants spent significantly more time on SERPs for
informational tasks than for navigational ones (mean=16.5 and
12.9s respectively, t(1208)=3.8, p < 0.01).

4.1 General Gaze Distribution on SERPs
We start our analysis with a general overview of the distribution
of visual attention on SERP components. Figure 1 shows a gaze
heat map depicting the distribution of visual attention, averaged

Second, most of the additional time during informational tasks
was spent on the organic results and on the upper search box.
Almost every single position in the organic results received more

46

Figure 7: Comparison of mean fixation impact on SERP elements for navigational and informational tasks (left) and for SERPs
displaying good or bad ads (right).
We further analyzed the participants’ search engine judgments for
each trial with respect to ad quality. When good quality ads were
displayed, participants rated the search engine slightly better than
when bad quality ads were presented (mean of 4.55 vs. 4.49 on a
5-point Likert scale), however this difference is not significant. In
addition, the total time to complete a task was about 10% shorter
when good quality ads were shown (mean 50.4s, σ=53.1) than
when bad quality ads were shown (mean 54.4s, σ=62.2), but this
difference is not significant.

visual attention for informational than for navigational tasks. This
is especially evident for the organic results at positions 1 and 2
(t(1208)=7.4, p < 0.01).
Interestingly, there was virtually no difference in the distribution
of gaze on the top 3 ads. For the right rail ads we observe slightly
more visual attention during informational tasks, although the
absolute amount of attention is very low (mean
informational=189ms, mean navigational=104ms, t(1208)=2.7, p
< 0.01).

Discussion. The quality of ads on a SERP directly influenced
participants’ attention and performance. Top ads of good quality
attracted twice as much visual attention as those of bad quality. In
addition, the amount of attention devoted to organic results was
influenced by the quality of the ads, with less attention to organic
results when the ads were good.

Discussion. It is striking that none of the extra time for
informational tasks was spent on the top ads. Users did not
distribute their additional time evenly on the elements of the
SERP but seemed to concentrate their attention on the top 2
organic results. This suggests that for informational tasks where
users typically focus more on text snippets, the bias for the top
organic results is even stronger.

The effect of ad quality on visual attention was not evident for
right rail ads. Right rail ads seem to be largely ignored, and when
participants looked there, they did not do so differentially as a
function of ad quality.

Furthermore, there is a noticeable difference in visual attention on
the upper search box which is more than twice as high for
informational tasks. This reflects that the fact users requeried
more during informational tasks (1.20 queries) than navigational
tasks (1.05 queries). Interestingly, even when participants were
not able to find the solution on the first static SERP, they did not
divert their attention much towards other components of the SERP
such as ads or related searches, instead they requeried.

4.4 Sequence Effects
Every sequence of 32 tasks was performed in three different
conditions, GB, BG, and RR (see Figure 4). The condition
determined the order in which good or bad quality ads were
displayed on the SERPs for the different tasks. In this section, we
concentrate on effects observed in those different conditions.
Figures 8 and 9 show results (for fixation impact and clicks) for
these three conditions, broken down separately for SERPs
containing good and bad ads.

4.3 Effects of Ad Quality
Figure 7 (right side) shows average fixation impact for SERP
elements, broken down separately for SERPs containing good and
bad ads. There are several large differences of the general gaze
distribution with respect to ad quality.

In Figure 8, we see that mean fixation impact on the top ads from
participants in either the BG or the GB condition was around 1.8
times larger than from participants in the RR condition
(t(1208)=5.3, p < 0.01). Good ads generated higher fixation
impact for all conditions than bad ads. In the blocked conditions
(BG and GB), good quality top ads received twice as much visual
attention as in the random condition (RR). Further, good quality top
ads in the random condition received only as much gaze as bad
quality top ads in the blocked conditions.

Overall, participants spent somewhat less time on SERPs when
good quality ads were displayed (mean time on SERP 14.2s,
σ=16.5s for good quality ads vs. 15.2s, σ=16.0s for bad quality
ads), however, the difference is not statistically significant.
There are, however, interesting differences in the gaze distribution
on different components of the SERPs. Participants devoted about
twice as much visual attention to top ads when the ads were of
good quality (mean=2.1s and 1.1s for good and bad quality,
respectively, t(1208)=6.8, p < 0.01). In contrast, participants paid
consistently less attention to the organic results when good quality
ads were displayed (mean=10.8s and 12.8s for good and bad
quality, respectively, t(1208)=2.6, p < 0.01). There were no
reliable effects of ad quality on the remaining SERP components
such as the search box, right rail ads, and related searches.

In Figure 9, we see even larger differences for clicks as a function
of condition and ad quality. Not surprisingly, the quality of the ads
had a large effect on click rate – there were no clicks on bad ads and
a click rate of about 13% for good ads. Condition also had a large
effect on click behavior. Participants in the BG or GB conditions
clicked on the top ads 2 to 3 times more often than participants in

47

Figure 8: Mean fixation impact on the top ads fi(top_ads) split
by sequence of blocks (GB, BG, RR) and the quality of the
displayed ads on the SERP (good / bad).

Figure 10: Mean fixation impact on the top ads fi(top_ads)
split by sequence of blocks (GB, BG, RR) and the block type
(good, bad or random) of each block of 8 trials (see Figure 4).
first to the second half (1st half mean=15.9s, 2nd half mean=13.5s,
t(1208)=2.5, p < 0.05).
Figure 10 shows the average fixation impact on top ads for the four
blocks in the experiment, broken down by condition. As expected,
during blocks containing SERPs with good ad quality (“G”), more
visual attention was directed to the top ads than during bad ad
quality blocks (“B”). For example, in the GB condition, users spent
more than twice as much time looking at top ads in the first and
third blocks which contain good quality ads. Within the random
condition, the highest fixation impact on the top ads occurs during
the first block, with a more than 30% drop for subsequent blocks
(1st block mean=1.5s, σ=1.7, 2nd-4th block mean=0.9s, σ=1.2,
t(377)=3.8, p < 0.01).

Figure 9: Mean number of clicks on the top ads split by
sequence of blocks for good ads (there were no clicks on bad
ads).
the RR condition (average click rate of 16% for BG and GB vs. 6%
for RR, t(1208)=3.0, p < 0.01).

Discussion. These findings show that if ad quality is predictably
good, then users do notice and pay more attention to the top ads.
Even after having experienced a block containing SERPs with bad
ads, participants start to pay more attention to the ads when their
quality changes. Interestingly, this was also the case for the second
block in the BG condition in which participants started with a block
of bad ad quality and then switched to a block of good ad quality.
This shows that amount of attention devoted to ads depends on the
context of previous experience.

Discussion. The differences in fixation impact and number of clicks
suggest that the order in which the participants see SERPs with
either good or bad ad quality strongly affected their search behavior.
When SERPs with good or bad ad quality were presented in random
order, participants tended to ignore the ads more, even when they
were of good quality. On the contrary, when SERPs contained ads
of consistently good quality, then participants were more likely to
pay attention to and click them.
This observation implies that predictability is an important factor
influencing how users attend to different regions on the SERP. If the
quality of ads is unpredictable, then users seem to get “ad blind” so
that even good ads receive less attention. This finding is of direct
importance to search engine providers, who might be able to
increase revenue from sponsored links by showing few ads of
consistently high quality. If ads are of predictably good quality, then
general ad blindness might be reversed.

Interestingly, the amount of visual attention on the top ads during
the first block of the random condition RR (which consists of 50%
SERPs with good quality ads) was the same as during the first block
of the BG condition (which consists almost only of SERPS with bad
quality ads). This suggests that predictability concerning the quality
of the ads is important from the very beginning. If quality is
unpredictable, then users quickly start to devote less attention to the
ads.

4.5 Blocking Effects

5. CONCLUSION

Since we designed the trial sequences to contain four blocks of
SERPs with different ad quality, we expected to see behavioral
changes within each trial sequence, especially with respect to the
way the participants attend to the top ads.

In this paper, we presented the results of an eye-tracking study to
characterize how factors such as task type and ad quality influence
how users allocate their visual attention to different components of
search engine results pages (SERPs). We found significant effects
of task type (informational/navigational), ad quality (good/bad) and
the sequence in which ads of different quality were shown.

As expected, we observed that participants completed tasks more
quickly during the course of the experiment. The total time they
needed to complete a task dropped from the first half to the second
half of the experiment (1st half mean=55.7s, 2nd half mean=49.1s,
t(1208)=2.0, p < 0.05). Also, the time the participants needed to
evaluate the first SERP for a given task query decreased from the

Consistent with previous research, we found a considerable bias of
users’ visual attention towards the top few organic result entries
which is even stronger for informational than for navigational tasks.
Furthermore, we found a strong bias against sponsored links in

48

[7] Downey, D., Dumais, S., Liebling, D. & Horvitz, E.
Understanding the relationship between searchers' queries and
information goals. In Proceedings CIKM 2008, 449-458.
[8] Fallows, D. Search engine users. Pew Research Center, 2005.
Retrieved January 18, 2010 from http//www.
pewinternet.org/Reports/2005/Search-Engine-Users.aspx.
[9] Granka, L. A., Joachims, T. & Gay, G. Eye-tracking analysis
of user behavior in WWW search. In Proceedings SIGIR 2004,
478-479.
[10] Guan, Z. & Cutrell, E. An eye tracking study of the effect of
target rank on web search. In Proceedings CHI 2007, 417-420.
[11] Höchstötter, N. & Lewandowski, D. What users see –
Structures in search engine results pages. Information
Sciences, 2009, vol. 179, 1796-1812.
[12] Hotchkiss, G., Alston, S. & Edwards, G. Eye tracking study,
2006. Retrieved January 18, 2010 from
http//www.enquiro.com/eyetrackingreport.asp.
[13] Jansen, B. J. The comparative effectiveness of sponsored and
nonsponsored links for Web e-commerce queries. ACM
Transactions on the Web, 2007, vol. 1, article 3.
[14] Jansen, B. J., Brown, A. & Resnick, M. Factors relating to the
decision to click on a sponsored link. Decision Support
Systems, 2007, vol. 44, 46-59.
[15] Jansen, B. J. & Spink, A. Investigating customer click through
behaviour with integrated sponsored and nonsponsored results.
International Journal of Internet Marketing and Advertising,
2009, vol. 5, 74-94.
[16] Joachims, T., Granka, L., Pan, B., Hembrooke, H. & Gay, G.
Accurately interpreting clickthrough data as implicit feedback.
In Proceedings SIGIR 2005, 154-161.
[17] Lorigo, L., Haridasan, M., Brynjarsdóttir, H., Xia, L.,
Joachims, T., Gay, G., Granka, L., Pellacini, F. & Pan, B. Eye
tracking and online search Lessons learned and challenges
ahead. JASIST, 2008, vol. 59, 1041-1052.
[18] Nielsen, J. F-Shaped pattern for reading Web content, 2006.
Retrieved January 18, 2010 from
http//www.useit.com/alertbox/reading_pattern.html.
[19] Pan, B., Hembrooke, H., Joachims, T., Lorigo, L., Gay, G. &
Granka, L. In Google we trust: Users' decisions on rank,
position, and relevance. Journal of Computer-Mediated
Communication, 2007, vol. 12, 801-823.
[20] Rose, D. E. & Levinson, D. Understanding user goals in web
search. In Proceedings WWW 2004, 13-19.
[21] Smith, C. L. & Kantor, P. B. User adaptation: Good results
from poor systems. In Proceedings SIGIR 2008, 147-154.
[22] Turpin, A. & Schöler, F. User performance versus precision
measures for simple search tasks. In Proceedings of SIGIR
2006, 11-18.
[23] White, R. W., Dumais, S.T. & Teevan, J. Characterizing the
influence of domain expertise on Web search. In Proceedings
of WSDM 2009, 132-141.
[24] White, R. W. & Morris, D. Investigating the querying and
browsing behavior of advanced search engine users. In
Proceedings of SIGIR 2007, 255-262.
[25] Yan, J., Liu, N., Wang, G., Zhang, W., Jiang, Y. & Chen, Z.
How much can behavioral targeting help online advertising? In
Proceedings WWW 2009, 261-270.

general. Even for informational tasks, in which participants
generally had a harder time finding a solution, the ads did not
receive any more attention from the participants.
The quality of ads had a significant influence on the amount of
visual attention that participants devoted to both the top ads and the
organic results. When good quality ads were displayed, participants
paid twice as much attention to these ads and less attention to the
organic results. This is strong evidence that how people attend to
search results depends on the quality and content of other page
elements.
In addition, gaze patterns were strongly related to the order in which
good and bad ads were presented. When the quality of ads varied
randomly across trials, participants attended to them less than half
as long as when the quality varied more predictably by blocks.
Strikingly, when ad quality varied randomly, participants attended
to the top ads no more than they did for trials in which only bad ads
were shown, even though the ads were good on half of the trials.
These results are relevant for search engine providers in
understanding how ads are perceived under different conditions, and
more generally in understanding how prior search experiences
influence the current allocation of attention.
This research represents a first step in understanding how task, ad
quality and sequence influence search interaction. In our study, we
focused on a specific static SERP composition which always
consisted of 10 textual organic results with top and right rail ads.
One next step for our research is to look at richer variations of
SERP composition, e.g., including snippets that contain images,
maps or deep links, and using a broader range of queries for which
ads may or may not be present. In addition, we would like to
explore how the quality of ads interacts with the quality of organic
results. For example, how does the presence of a bad ad (or result)
affect the perception of the other good quality ads (or results)?
Finally, we would like to extend our understanding of temporal
dynamics to enable us to develop richer models of search processes
and strategies that go beyond individual SERPs to include session
behavior as well as longer-term effects.

6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank our colleagues in adCenter, Bing and MSR
for their valuable comments and great support. We are also grateful
for the reviewers' thoughtful comments, and to our participants for
their time and insights.

7. REFERENCES
[1] Aula, A., Majaranta, P. & Räihä, K. Eye-tracking reveals the
personal styles for search result evaluation. In Proceedings
INTERACT 2005, 1058-1061.
[2] Broder, A. A taxonomy of web search. SIGIR Forum, 2002,
vol. 36, 3-10.
[3] Beymer, D., Russell, D. & Orton, P. Z. An eye tracking study
of how font size, font type, and pictures influence online
reading. In Proceedings INTERACT 2007, 456-460.
[4] Buscher, G., Cutrell, E. & Morris, M. R. What do you see
when you're surfing? Using eye tracking to predict salient
regions of web pages. In Proceedings CHI 2009, 21-30.
[5] Clarke, C. L. A.,, Agichtein, E.., Dumais, S. & White, R. W.
The influence of caption features on clickthrough patterns in
web search. In Proceedings SIGIR 2007, 135-142.
[6] Cutrell, E. & Guan, Z. What are you looking for? An eyetracking study of information usage in web search. In
Proceedings CHI 2007, 407-416.

49

