Visual Summarization of Web Pages∗
†

Binxing Jiao† ‡

Linjun Yang‡

Jizheng Xu‡

Feng Wu‡

MOE-MS KeyLab of MCC, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, 230026, P. R. China
‡
Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing 100190, P. R. China

bxjiao@gmail.com, {linjuny, jzxu, fengwu}@microsoft.com

ABSTRACT

Keywords

Visual summarization is an attractive new scheme to summarize web pages, which can help achieve a more friendly
user experience in search and re-ﬁnding tasks by allowing
users quickly get the idea of what the web page is about
and helping users recall the visited web page. In this paper, we perform a careful study on the recently proposed
visual summarization approaches, including the thumbnail
of the web page snapshot, the internal image in the web
page which is representative of the content in the page, and
the visual snippet which is a synthesized image based on
the internal image, the title, and the logo found in the web
page. Moreover, since the internal image based summarization approach hardly works when the representative internal
images are unavailable, we propose a new strategy, which
retrieves the representative image from the external to summarize the web page. The experimental results suggest that
the various summarization approaches have respective advantages on diﬀerent types of web pages. While internal
images and thumbnails can provide a reliable summarization on web pages with dominant images and web pages
with simple structure respectively, the external images are
regarded as a useful information to complement the internal images and are demonstrated very useful in helping users
understanding new web pages . The visual snippet performs
well on the re-ﬁnding tasks since it incorporates the title and
logo which are advantageous on identifying the visited web
pages.

web page summarization, visual summarization

1. INTRODUCTION
Search and re-ﬁnding tasks are among the most typical
applications on the Internet [4]. In order to help users accomplish these two tasks eﬃciently, systems usually provide
a summarization of web page so that users can quickly judge
whether the page is of interest. For example, the search
engine usually presents the search result using the summarization of web pages, consisting of the URL, page title and
a short textual snippets. When people try to re-ﬁnd the
web pages in the browsing history, they are likely to access
the bookmarks in the web browser, where visited web pages
are summarized by the url and the title. While most systems summarize web pages by text, due to its compactness
and simplicity, it is diﬃcult for users to quickly and precisely judge if one web page is of interest from the textual
summarization, since it is often time-consuming for users to
read a long text snippet or it usually cannot convey enough
information if the text snippet is short.
A picture is worth a thousand words. Information search
and re-ﬁnding tasks would become more eﬃcient if the web
pages are visually summarized, since it is easier for people
to get a quick understanding by seeing an image than reading text. Google has recently released the “Images from the
pages” feature [7] in its web search system, which summarizes the web page using the images in the page (we refer to
it as internal images in this paper). This feature presents
two images selected from the web page alongside the textual
snippet to users, from which users can quickly identify the
desired web pages, even without reading the textual snippets. Visual summarization can also used to enhance the
bookmarks in a Web browser to help users easily accomplish
the re-ﬁnding task. Apple’s web browser Safari 4 [15] has
introduced a new feature called “Top Sites”, which visualizes
users’ favorite web pages as a gorgeous 3D thumbnail wall
generated from the downsized snapshot of the web pages.
Although thumbnails [15, 11] and internal images of web
pages [7] are adopted by the mainstream companies due to
the simplicity, they suﬀer from several disadvantages. First,
for those web pages which have complex layout or rich content, users are diﬃcult to see clearly anything useful from
the small thumbnails. Second, although the internal images
are proved to be more informative than the thumbnail [12],
they are unavailable for a large amount of web pages which
do not contain useful images.
To deal with the above mentioned diﬃculties of internal

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.5.m [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: Miscellaneous

General Terms
Algorithms, Experimentation
∗This work was performed at Microsoft Research Asia.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07 ...$10.00.

499

“image excerpt”. The dominant images are ﬁrst detected
by a trained model based on three levels of image features.
And then the most relevant one is selected based on the
relationship between the query and the image’s surrounding text. Visual Snippet [17], which is an image generated
by composing a dominant image from the web page, a watermarked logo, and salient text (e.g. title) from the web
page, is an extension of “image excerpts”. These two dominant image based approaches are proved to be more informative for search compared to the above thumbnail based
approaches. Internal image based summarizations are also
adopted by industrial products, such as Google’s “Images
from the pages” [7]. However, as aforementioned, for a large
amount of web pages, useful internal images are unavailable,
which limits the applicability of such approaches.
Some studies have involved how diﬀerent summarizations
perform in search and re-ﬁnding tasks. Woodruﬀ et al. [20]
conduct a study to examine the use of text summaries, raw
thumbnails, as well as the enhanced thumbnails in a web
search task and ﬁnd that for some questions, text summaries
outperform raw thumbnails while for other questions, raw
thumbnails outperform text summaries. Enhanced thumbnails have better and more consistent performance than either text summaries or raw thumbnails. Teevan et al. [17] explore how text summaries, raw thumbnails and visual snippet perform in both search and re-ﬁnding tasks. In this
paper, we explore not only how diﬀerent summarizations
perform in search and re-ﬁnding tasks, but also how diﬀerent summarizations perform for diﬀerent kinds of web pages.

image based visual summarization, in this paper we propose to mine images from the external for the visual summarization of web pages without suitable internal images,
which is so-called external image based visual summarization. Furthermore, we perform a comparative study to investigate the applicability of the diﬀerent visual summarization approaches to diﬀerent kinds of web pages and for different tasks including search and re-ﬁnding. The diﬀerent
approaches, including thumbnails, internal images, external
images, and a recently proposed new scheme called visual
snippet [17], are analyzed based on user study, from which
some conclusions are drawn which can provide guidance for
the practical application of visual summarization for web
pages.
The paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we review
related work. Three kinds of technology for generating visual summarizations will be introduced in section 3, 4 and
5. Experimental results and user study are reported in Section 6 and 7. At last, we conclude this paper and point our
future work in Section 8.

2.

RELATED WORK

Thumbnail [18, 15, 6, 3, 5, 19, 20] and internal image
[7, 12, 17] based visual summarizations are widely studied
in research communities and commonly adopted in existing
products.
Thumbnail is a scaled-down image which displays a snapshot of a web page as rendered in the web browser. Due to its
simplicity, it is commonly adopted in existing products [18,
15, 6]. Viewzi [18] presents users the search result using not
only the text snippets, but also the thumbnail of the web
page, for web search. Firefox “FastDial” [6], like Safari 4 [15],
visualizes bookmarks as thumbnails. Alongside the widely
adoption of visual summarization of web pages in industry,
many research eﬀorts have been invested on this problem in
the academia as well. Some studies are focused on the design of thumbnail. Cockburn et al. [3] generate thumbnails
that consist of reduced images plus graphical icons that indicate bookmarked and frequently visited pages. Dziadosz
and Chandrasekar [5] suggest that thumbnails of web pages
used along with text snippets in search engine interface can
help users in reducing predicting errors, at little time cost
in processing time. Woodruﬀ et al. [19, 20] design textually
enhanced thumbnails, which enhance the readability of certain parts of the document within the thumbnail and display
highlighted keywords transparently overlaid on the reduced
document. As a result, the enhanced thumbnail takes advantages of both textual summaries and raw thumbnails.
However, in the above applications, raw thumbnail has disadvantages that for those web pages which have rich content, users are diﬃcult to see clearly anything useful from
the small thumbnail. Though enhanced thumbnails [3, 19]
address this problem to some extent, they are task speciﬁc
because they only focus on elements relating to speciﬁc tasks
(e.g., query term in the case of Woodruﬀ et al. [19, 20] or
visitation data in the case of Cockburn et al. [3]).
In order to address the problems of thumbnail based summarization, internal image based summarizations are proposed as an alternative approach since internal images usually can describe the content of the hosting web page. In
order to improve the relevance judgment of web search results, Li et al. [12] proposes an internal image based scheme
which extracts the dominant images from the web page as

3. INTERNAL IMAGE BASED VISUAL SUMMARIZATION
The images contained in a web page are usually used to
describe the content of the page, which are so-called internal
images and can be directly used to summarize the web page.
However, a typical web page may contain a lot of images,
most of which are advertisement images, decoration images
and logos. Hence we need to detect the most dominant
among all the images in a web page for visual summarization. In this paper, we adopt the learning-based algorithm
proposed in [21] for dominant image detection, which will
be described as follows.
First, we need to extract features for all the images based
on the property of the image itself, the relationship of the
image to the hosting web page, and the site information, as
summarized in Table 1. The details of the features can be
found in [21]. Then an image dominance detection model
can be learned from some labeled training samples, which
are represented as (xi,j , yi,j ), where xi,j is the extracted feature vector of the image i in the page j and yi,j is its labeled
dominance. Each image for training is assigned an important level, namely 0 (useless), 1 (important) and 2 (highly
important). We regard the dominance detection problem
as a ranking problem since there are multiple dominance
levels. Then we use linear Ranking-SVM [9] to train the
ranking model for dominance detection.1

4. VISUAL SNIPPET
Visual Snippet [17] is a recently proposed web page summarization approach which enriches internal dominant im1
We directly use the trained model in [21]. Thanks to the
authors for providing us the valuable model.

500

Table 1: Features for dominant image detection.
Feature kind Feature name
Image Level size, width/height ratio, blurriness,
contrast, colorfulness, photo vs.
graphic
Page Level
relative pos, relative size, relative
width/height ratio
Site Level
IsInnerSite

(a) Dominant Image

(b) Visual Snippet

ages by synthesizing the salient text (e.g. title), dominant
image, and logo into a single image. It’s designed to capture
the respective advantages of textual snippets and internal
images.
The visual snippet generation algorithm consists of four
steps, which are described as follows.
(c) Thumbnail

1. Internal dominant image selection and processing: The dominant image is detected by the algorithm
shown in Section 3. Then the detected dominant image is auto-cropped to extract the salient area using
the algorithm proposed in [13].

Figure 1: Dominant Image, Visual Snippet and
Thumbnail Sample.

2. Logo extraction: Logo images are detected by a
trained model [14] using features including the image’s
location in the page, size, name and surrounding text).
Then the detected logo is scaled to ﬁt within a 120x45
rectangle while preserving the aspect ratio.

Web Page

Most Relevant
External Image

4. Image Composition: The logo is made semi-transparent
and overlaid on top of the dominant image, and the
cropped title is placed above the image and the logo
with a white background for readability.
Figure 1 (a) and (b) show an example2 of the dominant
image selected by the algorithm in Section 3 and visual snippet generated by the algorithm as aforementioned.

EXTERNAL IMAGE BASED VISUAL SUMMARIZATION

The aforementioned summarization methods including internal image and visual snippet both require that there are
dominant images in the web page. However, for a large
amount of web pages, the dominant images which can represent the information of the web page don’t exist. How to
generate a meaningful visual summarization for such web
pages is a new challenge to the web page summarization
problem.
The intuitive idea to address this problem is to retrieve
images which can represent visually the web page from the
whole Internet. It is so-called external image based approach
compared with the internal images discussed before. The
idea can be brieﬂy stated as follows. Firstly the key phrases,
which can represent the salient topics in the web page, are
2

Key
phrases

Image
Search

3. Title extraction: The title is extracted from the html
source of the web page. Then the ﬁrst 19 characters of
the title are cropped based on the study in [10] that the
leftmost 15-20 letters of a page’s title yield reasonable
recognition of the page’s site.

5.

Key Phrase
Extraction

Textual
Ranking
and Visual
Filtering

Images &
Correspondi
ng Webpages

Figure 2: The work flow of the proposed system.
The circle boxes denote operations, and the rectangle boxes denote the results after the operations.

extracted. Then the key phrases are used as queries to query
the image search engine for the images relevant to the topics
of the web page. Thirdly the returned image results are
reranked based on the textual similarity between the web
page containing the result image and the target web page
to be summarized as well as the visual similarity among the
result images. Finally the top ranked image are used to
summarize the target web page.
Figure 2 illustrates the work ﬂow of our approach.

5.1 Key Phrase Extraction
In this paper we employ the KEX algorithm proposed
in [2] to extract the key phrases from web pages.
In KEX, initial term sequences are ﬁrst extracted by splitting the texts up according to phrase boundaries such as
punctuation marks and dashes. Then candidate key phrases
are generated using all subsequences of these initial term
sequences up to a given length (4 in [2]). After these candidate key phrases are ﬁltered using query logs, two kinds of
features, including 3 structured features which are related

http://www.expandore.com/product/sony/Proav/broadcast.htm

501

6.1 Experiment Setup

to the structure of HTML ﬁle and 3 text features which are
related to text content, are calculated. Finally given the
features and user labeled salience score, a model is trained
by logistic regression. More details can be seen in [2].
In our experiment, after we calculate the salience score of
each candidate phrase, the top 4 key phrases with the highest scores are used as queries to the image search engine.
For each key phrase, 30 results including images and corresponding web pages are retrieved for further processing.

In order to evaluate our system, ﬁrstly we randomly selected 100 queries from the query set released by KDD CUP
2005, covering diﬀerent queries including “Computers”, “Entertainment”, “Information”, “Living”, “Online Community”,
“Shopping” and “Sports”. Then we used the Bing Search
API [1] to retrieve the top 100 search results for each of the
queries. Then the web pages and the included images were
crawled for the top 100 results for each of the 100 queries.
Finally, our dataset including 8412 retrieved web pages was
obtained.
For each web page in our dataset, we downloaded all of
the internal images and retrieved external images using the
aforementioned algorithm. After all of these images were
obtained, we recruited expert labelers to annotate whether
the internal images were dominant and the external images
were relevant to summarize the corresponding web pages. In
the remaining of this paper, the web pages with at least one
internal image annotated as dominant are denoted as “DIP”.
Those without any dominant internal image annotated are
denoted as “NDIP”. In our dataset, we notice that about
41.8% of the web pages are NDIPs, which demonstrates that
internal dominant images are unavailable for a large amount
of web pages.
Moreover, in order to compare the diﬀerent summarization approaches, we generated the four summaries of nearly
the same size so that the result is not aﬀected by the diﬀerent sizes. The settings to generate the four summaries are
listed as follows:

5.2 Image Ranking and Filtering
We develop algorithm to rerank and ﬁlter images in the
key phrase based search result based on two assumptions.
First, good candidate images for visual summarization are
likely to appear in web pages textually similar to the target
page; Second, an image is more important if more images are
visually similar to it. Thereafter, in our algorithm, we ﬁrstly
rank result images based on the textual similarities between
the web pages containing the images and the target web
page. Then we propose an algorithm to ﬁlter out visually
unimportant images.
Textual similarity between two web pages is calculated by
cosine similarity based on vector space model(VSM). First,
TFIDF (Term Frequency Inverse Document Frequency) score
is calculated for each term in the web page. a web page is
represented as a vector where each component is a TFIDF
score of a particular term in the page. Finally cosine similarity [16] is adopted to calculate textual similarity between
each result web page and the target web page.
Visual importance of result images is calculated using VisualRank [8]. For each image, we ﬁrstly extract local SIFT
features which are a 128-dimensional vector. Then the similarity between two images is deﬁned as the number of local
features shared between them divided by the average number of local features in the two images. Finally, a graph is
constructed with images as vertices and visual similarities
as weights on edges. PageRank is applied on the similarity
graph and then the resulted rank score vector is employed to
represent the importance of each image. The images whose
importance score is below a threshold will be ﬁltered out.
Consequentially the relevance of the image to the target
web page can be deﬁned as

Sim(i, T W ) =

1. Thumbnail (the size is of 160x120). As a tradeoﬀ
between the amount of information and the ability to
be recognized, a thumbnail is created ﬁrst by clipping a
snapshot area of 640x480 from the web page and then
resizing to 160x120.
2. Internal Image (the size is of about 160x120 while
keeping the aspect ratio). An internal image with the
highest dominance score is selected, no matter if it is
a dominant image or not.
3. Visual Snippet (the size is of 160x120).
4. External Image (the size is of about 160x120 while
keeping the aspect ratio).

T I(CWi , T W ), if VRScore>Thresh
0,
otherwise.

After these summaries were generated, we asked the labelers to judge which summary, including the internal image,
the external image, the thumbnail, and the visual snippet,
is the best to represent the web page. If the labeler thinks
all of them cannot summarize the page, he/she can select
“others”.

where CWi is the ith candidate web page, T W is the target web page and T I(CWi , T W ) is the TFIDF cosine similarity between CWi and T W . V RScore is the importance
computed by VisualRank. T hresh is the threshold which is
set to the average of V RScore of all of the candidate images
in our experiment.

6.

6.2 Usefulness of external images
Table 2 shows the proportion of web pages which have at
least one external images annotated as relevant in the entire
dataset, DIPs and NDIPs, respectively. External images
retrieved by our algorithm are labeled as relevant for 53.3%
web pages in the entire dataset. Based on this observation,
external images can be considered as a useful source for web
page summarization.
Moreover, the external images are labeled as relevant for
59.9% of DIPs and 44.0% of NDIPs, respectively. We can see
that surprisingly the proportion of web pages for which the

EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

We have conducted numerous experiments to evaluate the
performance of various visual summarization approaches.
First we introduce the dataset and our experimental setup.
Then we evaluate the usefulness of external images of our
system based on the labeled data in our dataset. Finally we
discuss how various visual summaries perform for diﬀerent
kinds of web pages.

502

information (title and logo) than a single internal image.
To explain this observation, we discussed with the labelers
and found that some weakness slightly let down the approbatory of visual snippet. Speciﬁcally, the title information
sometimes doesn’t describe the content of the dominant image and this would mislead the users; more importantly, visual snippet is composed of three kind of components, which
seems a little rough-and-tumble. Therefore, though visual
snippet is promising for representing web pages, current implementation limits its applicability.

Table 2: Proportions of web pages with annotated
external images.
Total Page with Rel- Proportion
evant External
Image
Entire Dataset 8412 4480
53.3%
DIP
4894 2932
59.9%
NDIP
3518 1548
44.0%

Table 3: Statistics of the
Best Summarization
Internal
External
Thumbnail
VisualSnippet
Others

6.3.2 Thumbnail as the best summarization

best summarization.
NDIP
DIP
0
44.01%
34.51% 14.69%
36.24% 27.99%
2.67% 13.24%
26.58% 0.06%

We explain some characteristics of those web pages which
are best summarized by thumbnails. By observing the web
pages which can be best represented by thumbnails, we categorize these pages into the following categories including
“pages in small size”, “pages with several images in snapshot
area”, “pages with salient and clear image/text in snapshot
area”, “pages with logo in snapshot area”, “pages with simple
page structure”, and “pages in well-known web site”. Among
those pages for which thumbnails are not good summaries,
most of them contain a large amount of text. Since texts are
usually unable to be seen clearly in a thumbnail with small
size, it is diﬃcult for users to recognize or recall these pages
containing many text in the body.
For 27.99% of DIP, the thumbnail based summarization
outperforms all of the other summarizations. Based on our
observations, users tend to choose thumbnail as the best
summarization for “pages with salient and clear image/text
in snapshot area”. Since dominant images are contained and
can usually be recognized in the thumbnail, users tend to
choose thumbnails as better summarizations because thumbnail can contain more information (e.g. structure of web
page) than a single dominant image.
For 36.24% of NDIP, the thumbnail based summarization
outperforms all of the other summarizations. This is partly
because sometimes external images are not that relevant to
the target web page. On the other hand, for NDIP, thumbnail based summarization is preferential for “pages with logo
in snapshot area” and “pages in well-known web site”.

external images are useful in DIPs is even larger than that
in NDIPs. We argue it is because that web pages containing
dominant images can be regarded as more appropriate for
visual summarization, which, hence, can also be summarized
well by a relevant image retrieved from the external. In addition, the external images are useful for 44.0% web pages of
NDIPs, which states that the external images are a valuable
complement to internal images for visual summarization of
web pages.

6.3 Comparison of various visual summaries
Based on the labelers’ judges on which summary is the
best for each of web pages, we conduct the statistics on the
proportion of web pages for which the various summaries
are regarded as the best, in DIPs and NDIPs, respectively,
as shown in Table 3.
We assume that web pages which have the same kind of
best summarizations are likely to have common characteristics. To explore these characteristics, we looked through our
labeled data, and we also had an interview with our labelers
to know their thoughts about this problem. Finally some
conclusions about the summarization problem were drawn
from our observation and the labelers’ suggestions.

6.3.3 External Image as the best summarization
For 34.51% of NDIP, the external images are voted as the
best summarization. For all of these web pages, external images are annotated as relevant by labelers. However, 50.3%
of external images are not relevant to web pages which are
best summarized by other summarizations. Therefore, the
relevance of external image is the crucial factor to select
external image based summarization for NDIPs. However,
though useful, external images often suﬀer from reliability
problem, i.e., external images retrieved from the web are
not always that relevant to the target web pages, which is
demonstrated in Section 6.2. For NDIPs, external images
with tremendous relevance scores can be adopted as reliable
summarizations, otherwise, thumbnails are better, especially
for “pages with logo in snapshot area” and “pages in wellknown web site”.
For 14.69% of DIP, the external images outperform the
internal images. This is because for some web pages about
popular topics, there are relevant images across the web.
This suggests that external images, as well as internal images, should be uniquely taken into consideration when we

6.3.1 Dominant Image and Visual Snippet as the best
summarization
The dominant image can only be adopted for DIP, and it
is voted as the best one for 44.01% of DIP. Besides, visual
snippet which is also a dominant image based summarization
is voted as the best for 13.24% of DIP. Therefore, dominant
image based summarizations are the best summarization for
over a half DIPs. Summarizing web pages using dominant
images is reasonable because dominant images can present
the ideas of the web pages and often they are impressive to
attract users’ attention. However, thumbnail and external
image based summarization are voted as the best summarization for 27.99% and 14.69% of DIPs respectively. We will
explain why these two summarizations outperform dominant
image based summarization in the next two sections.
We also notice that for most web pages of DIP, the visual
snippet is worse than the dominant image. This observation
seems anti-intuition because a visual snippet contains more

503

participant cannot understand the summarization; score 1
means the summarization can help users grasp a rough idea
on what the page is about and score 3 means the summarization can help users exactly understand the content of the
web page; score 2 is the between of 1 and 3.
We note that the order in which the diﬀerent summarization methods are provided to users would aﬀect the judges
of the subsequent summaries. For example, if a participant
sees the internal image ﬁrst, she may get more from the
thumbnail which may include the internal images, so that
she would obtain a better understanding of the page from
the thumbnail. In order to avoid such a bias, the participants were divided into 4 groups. Each group was provided
a single visual summarization type.

calculate the dominance of image based summarizations in
our future work.

6.3.4 Summary
As a conclusion, after the comparison of web pages which
are best represented by diﬀerent visual summarizations, we
propose several guidance of selecting summarization type
here.
For NDIP, external images are useful summarizations, but
they also suﬀer from reliability problem. Thumbnail based
summarizations are also good for NDIP, especially for “pages
with logo in snapshot area” and “pages in well-known web
site”.
For DIP, if the dominant images are contained and can be
recognized in the thumbnail, thumbnail is the best choice
for summarization; otherwise dominant images are more reliable. Besides, for a web page of DIP, if an exclusive dominant image is found and the title information agrees with the
content of the dominant image, visual snippet tends to outperform a single dominant image. Actually, an automatic
learning algorithm for selecting the best summarization is
our future work.

7.

7.1.2 Phase 2: Re-finding
In several hours after participants completed phase 1, they
were asked to accomplish the second phase of the user study.
In this phase, we explored how the various summarization
types would aﬀect the recall of the web pages visited in phase
1. Participants were asked to re-ﬁnd the web page based
solely on one visual summary. In this phase, after we speciﬁed a web page to be re-found, the participants were asked
to select an image, which can remind them of the web page,
from an image collection including a single kind of visual
summary for all of the web pages.
The participants were also divided into four groups; each
of them was exactly the same as that in phase 1. Since a visual snippet is partly based on internal dominant images, we
did not supply these two summarization types at the same
time. Therefore, two groups were provided visual snippets;
the other two groups were provided internal images.
In order to evaluate the performance of each summarization type for this phase, we deﬁne the error rate of a summarization type (e(s)) as

USER STUDY

We have conducted a user study to compare how participants use diﬀerent summarizations to understand and
re-ﬁnd web pages. The goal of this study is to explore how
diﬀerent summarization approaches (thumbnail, internal image, external image and visual snippet) support a understanding or a re-finding task.

7.1 Set-up
51 participants were invited to conduct our user study,
all of whom have at least an Bachelor’s degree and range in
age from 20 to 35 years old. Among them, 56% participants
are male. Besides, the participants are all heavy web users,
covering a large range of careers, such as computer engineers,
researchers, designers, and students.
In this study, the participants were asked to complete a
two-phase study. The ﬁrst phase involves understanding the
contents of web pages that have never been visited by the
participants. The second phase involves re-finding the web
pages that have been visited during the ﬁrst phase.
The 11 web pages in this study are chosen from a range
of diﬀerent categories, for example amazon for online sales,
wikipedia for information provider. 2 of the 11 web pages
are NDIPs. A simple descriptive name extracted from the
url for each web page is listed below the x axis in ﬁgure 3
and 4.


e(s) =

I{GuessedW ebpage = DesiredW ebpage|s}
,
N umberof P articipants

where I{GuessedW ebpage = T argetW ebpage|s} is an indicator which equals to 1 when the web page guessed by a
participant based on a summarization type (s) is not the
desired web page.

7.2 Results and Discussion
7.2.1 Understanding Task
For each summarization method, we average the scores
by diﬀerent participants for each of web pages, respectively.
The result is shown in Figure 3, from which we can draw
the following conclusions.
From the ﬁgure, we can draw several conclusions about
the performance of diﬀerent summarizations for this understanding task.
First, none of the summarization types always perform
the best for any kind of web pages. For example, internal
images perform well in DIP. However, they get a score below
0 for NDIP (e.g. coldwar3 ). Therefore, we analyze the performance of summarizations for DIP and NDIP respectively.
For the 9 web pages which are DIP , internal images
achieve an average score of 1.62 while the average scores
for the thumbnail, the visual snippet, and external image

7.1.1 Phase 1: Understanding
In this phase, the participants were asked to perform 11
tasks about the understanding of web pages. For each task,
each participant was given a web page and one of the four
visual summaries corresponding to the web page. The participants were asked to strictly perform the following two
steps. First they guessed the content of the web page based
solely on the provided visual summarization without reading
the web page. The second step was to read the web page and
to rate a score ranging from -1 to 3 based on whether participants have guessed the content of the web page from the
visual summary. Speciﬁcally, score -1 means that the summarization misleads the participant; score 0 means that the

3

504

http://www.coldwar.org/articles/90s/BorisYeltsin.asp

group 1 (thumbnail)

group 2 (internal)

group 3 (snippet)

group 4 (external)

3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
ClinicBball

Amazon

wikipedia

cellphone

allinlondon

sony

summit

hotel

dolls

xbox

coldwar

Figure 3: Average scores for all of the web pages in phase 1.
visual snippet for most of DIPs, which indicates that although users re-ﬁnd the web page via visual information, a
short but descriptive text (e.g. cropped title) is also important.
The external image based summarization is not suitable
for this task. Intuitively, an image which the users do not
see in the target web page before will not recall the users
of the page. Besides, external images suﬀer from reliability
problem, i.e., retrieved external images are sometimes not
that relevant to the web pages. Therefore, external image
based summarization is a useful complementary for NDIPs
in understanding task, however, it is not suitable for reﬁnding task, even for NDIPs.

Table 4: Error rate for various summaries.
Summary
Error Rate
Internal Image
0.175
Visual Snippet
0.076
Thumbnail
0.143
External Image
0.152

are 1.27, 1.24 and 1.29, respectively. Moreover, for a large
majority of DIPs (6 out of 9), dominant image achieves the
best result. For the other three DIPs for which internal
images are not the best, based on our interview with the
participants we ﬁnd that it is mainly because the participants do not understand the contents of these images due to
the limited expertise of the participants on these topics. In
conclusion, for DIP, dominant internal images are regarded
as the best summarization.
For the 2 web pages which are NDIP in our study, thumbnail and external image based summarizations achieve relatively high average scores of 1.62 and 1.17 respectively, while
the average scores for internal image and visual snippet are
-0.65 and 0.46 respectively. The average score for internal
image illustrates that the non-dominant internal images selected from NDIP would mislead users (e.g. coldwar in the
study).

8. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we present a careful study on comparing
the various visual summarization methods for web pages,
including thumbnails, internal images, and visual snippets.
An extension to internal image based visual summarization
is proposed, which selects the representative images not from
within the web page, but from the external entire Internet.
The experimental results and user studies suggest that
the various summarization approaches have respective advantages on diﬀerent types of web pages and for diﬀerent
tasks. While thumbnails are simple and eﬀective for web
pages with simple structure or clear image and text with
large size, internal images can summarize the web page well
if it includes dominant images. The external images are a
useful source for those web pages without dominant images
and can be regarded as a valuable complement to internal
images. Visual snippets are extremely eﬀective in helping
users identifying the visited web pages in the re-ﬁnding task.
The above conclusions suggest two future work. First,
since the internal and external images have respective advantages, we will develop an integrated framework which
does not select the internal images and external images separately, but selects the representative images from a combined pool of internal and external images. Second, we can
develop an algorithm to automatically select the most appropriate visual summaries from the four types of candidates
based on the type of the web page and the tasks for which
the summaries are used, so that the user satisfaction is improved over each of the individuals.

7.2.2 Re-finding Task
We draw the error rates of various summarizations (e(s))
for all of the web pages in Figure 4. From this ﬁgure, the
error rates of some summarizations (e.g. internal image,
thumbnail) vary among diﬀerent web pages, i.e. this reﬁnding task is also web page dependent. However, we can
draw some common conclusions for this speciﬁc task.
We average the error rate on all of the web pages for every
summarization type and the result is shown in Table 4.
The visual snippet performs better than, or comparably
with other summarizations. Especially, the dominant internal images are worse than the visual snippet although the
main informative visual part of the visual snippet is the dominant internal image. Thus, the additional two components
of the visual snippet: title and logo information are useful
for identifying diﬀerent visited web pages.
The thumbnail based summarization outperforms visual
snippet for NDIPs since the visual snippet is generated from
non-dominant images in this case. However, it is worse than

9. REFERENCES
[1] Bing API. http://www.bing.com/developers.

505

thumbnail (51 participants)

internal (27 participants)

snippet (24 participants)

external (39 participants)

0.5
0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0

ClinicBball

Amazon

wikipedia

cellphone

allinlondon

sony

summit

hotel

dolls

xbox

coldwar

Figure 4: Error rate for all of the web pages in Phase 2.
[2] M. Chen, J.-T. Sun, H.-J. Zeng, and K.-Y. Lam. A
practical system of keyphrase extraction for web
pages. In CIKM ’05: Proceedings of the 14th ACM
international conference on Information and
knowledge management, pages 277–278, New York,
NY, USA, 2005. ACM.
[3] A. Cockburn, S. Greenberg, B. McKenzie,
M. Jasonsmith, and S. Kaasten. Webview: A graphical
aid for revisiting web pages, 1999.
[4] A. Cockburn and B. Mckenzie. What do web users do?
an empirical analysis of web use. International Journal
of Human-Computer Studies, 54:903–922, 2000.
[5] S. Dziadosz and R. Chandrasekar. Do thumbnail
previews help users make better relevance decisions
about web search results? In SIGIR ’02: Proceedings
of the 25th annual international ACM SIGIR
conference on Research and development in
information retrieval, pages 365–366, New York, NY,
USA, 2002. ACM.
[6] FastDial.
https://addons.mozilla.org/en-us/ﬁrefox/addon/5721.
[7] Google. http://www.google.com.
[8] Y. Jing and S. Baluja. Visualrank: Applying pagerank
to large-scale image search. Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, IEEE Transactions on,
30(11):1877–1890, May 2008.
[9] T. Joachims. Optimizing search engines using
clickthrough data. In KDD ’02: Proceedings of the
eighth ACM SIGKDD international conference on
Knowledge discovery and data mining, pages 133–142,
New York, NY, USA, 2002. ACM.
[10] S. Kaasten, S. Greenberg, and C. Edwards. How
people recognize previously seen web pages from titles,
urls and thumbnails. In Proceedings of Human
Computer Interaction, pages 247–265, 2001.
[11] T. Kopetzky and M. Mühlhäuser. Visual preview for
link traversal on the world wide web. In WWW ’99:
Proceedings of the eighth international conference on
World Wide Web, pages 1525–1532, New York, NY,
USA, 1999.

[12] Z. Li and L. Zhang. Improving relevance judgment of
web search results with image excerpts. In WWW ’08:
Proceedings of the 17th international conference on
World Wide Web, pages 21–30, April 2008.
[13] Y.-F. Ma and H.-J. Zhang. Contrast-based image
attention analysis by using fuzzy growing. In
MULTIMEDIA ’03: Proceedings of the eleventh ACM
international conference on Multimedia, pages
374–381, New York, NY, USA, 2003. ACM.
[14] T. Maekawa, T. Hara, and S. Nishio. Image
classiﬁcation for mobile web browsing. In WWW ’06:
Proceedings of the 15th international conference on
World Wide Web, pages 43–52, New York, NY, USA,
2006. ACM.
[15] Safari4. http://www.apple.com/safari.
[16] G. Salton and C. Buckley. Term-weighting approaches
in automatic text retrieval. Inf. Process. Manage.,
24(5):513–523, 1988.
[17] J. Teevan, E. Cutrell, D. Fisher, S. M. Drucker,
G. Ramos, P. André, and C. Hu. Visual snippets:
summarizing web pages for search and revisitation. In
CHI ’09: Proceedings of the 27th international
conference on Human factors in computing systems,
pages 2023–2032, New York, NY, USA, 2009. ACM.
[18] Viewzi.
http://www.viewzi.com/search/webscreenshot.
[19] A. Woodruﬀ, A. Faulring, R. Rosenholtz, J. Morrsion,
and P. Pirolli. Using thumbnails to search the web. In
CHI ’01: Proceedings of the 19th international
conference on Human factors in computing systems,
pages 198–205, New York, NY, USA, 2001. ACM.
[20] A. Woodruﬀ, R. Rosenholtz, J. B. Morrison,
A. Faulring, and P. Pirolli. A comparison of the use of
text summaries, plain thumbnails, and enhanced
thumbnails for web search tasks. J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci.
Technol., 53(2):172–185, 2002.
[21] Q. Yu, S. Shi, Z. Li, J.-R. Wen, and W.-Y. Ma.
Improve ranking by using image information. In
ECIR’07: Proceedings of the 29th European conference
on IR research, pages 645–652, 2007.

506

