The Demographics of Web Search
Ingmar Weber

Carlos Castillo

Yahoo! Research Barcelona
Diagonal 177, 08018 Barcelona, Spain

Yahoo! Research Barcelona
Diagonal 177, 08018 Barcelona, Spain

ingmar@yahoo-inc.om

chato@yahoo-inc.com

ABSTRACT

Keywords

How does the web search behavior of “rich” and “poor” people differ? Do men and women tend to click on different
results for the same query? What are some queries almost
exclusively issued by African Americans? These are some of
the questions we address in this study.
Our research combines three data sources: the query log
of a major US-based web search engine, profile information
provided by 28 million of its users (birth year, gender and
ZIP code), and US-census information including detailed demographic information aggregated at the level of ZIP code.
Through this combination we can annotate each query with,
e.g. the average per-capita income in the ZIP code it originated from. Though conceptually simple, this combination
immediately creates a powerful user modeling tool.
The main contributions of this work are the following.
First, we provide a demographic description of a large sample of search engine users in the US and show that it agrees
well with the distribution of the US population. Second, we
describe how different segments of the population differ in
their search behavior, e.g. with respect to the queries they
formulate or the URLs they click. Third, we explore applications of our methodology to improve web search relevance
and to provide better query suggestions.
These results enable a wide range of applications including improving web search and advertising where, for instance, targeted advertisements for “family vacations” could
be adapted to the (expected) income.

Web search, Demographic factors

1.

INTRODUCTION

What kind of web results would you personally want to
see for the query “wagner”? Well, if you are a typical female
US web user you probably have pages about the composer
Richard Wagner in mind.1 However, if you are a male US
web user you are more likely to be referring to a company
called Wagner which produces paint sprayers.2 Similarly,
the term most likely to complete the beginning “hal” is in
general “lindsey”3 , whereas for people living in areas with
an above average education level the most likely completion
is “higdon”4 These two examples illustrate that demographic
factors have a measurable influence on search behavior.
Even though this user modeling can be an interesting end
by itself, the ultimate goal for the search engine is to provide
a better service to users. This can take the form of more
relevant search results, more helpful query suggestions, more
interesting news items on a portal page or, last not least,
improved targeting of advertising. Of course, the potential
for improvements in these areas is not new and there exists
a rich set of literature on the use of personalization [6, 26].
Our approach of grouping users by demographic features,
such as age or income, is different from personalization where
models are learned for individual users. Given enough data
about individual users, personalization can indeed be very
powerful. However, our approach is more applicable in practice because (i) it requires less training data, as we use a
small number of different user classes, (ii) it has less potential for breaching the user’s privacy, as we do not aggregate
information on a per-user level, and (iii) it has a simpler interpretation, as we use real-life features with clear semantics
instead of latent variables.
As far as sponsored search is concerned, especially this
last issue is of relevance as advertisers could, e.g., choose
to have their ads displayed only for users in a particular expected income range. This would go well beyond the current
“demographic site selection”, which uses only age and gender

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Search process; H.1.2 [User/Machine Systems]: Human factors

General Terms
Human Factors, Measurement

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07 ...$10.00.

1
For women the most clicked URL was
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_Wagner.
2
For men the most clicked URL was
http://www.wagnerspraytech.com/.
3
Hal Lindsey is an American evangelist and Christian writer.
4
Hal Higdon is an American writer and runner.

523

and works only for banner ads, but is not widely used for
sponsored search.5
The main contributions of our study are:

Income, race, and the digital divide. When demographic dimensions such as income or age are related with internet usage, an unequal access is observed, which is known
as the Digital Divide [22]. The digital divide, for instance,
establishes a gap between countries with a high gross domestic product and countries with a low gross domestic product
in terms of broadband access. The digital divide also can
be observed within a country by itself. For instance, in the
US it has been observed that more income and more education are correlated with a higher probability of having a
computer at home, but that African Americans6 are much
less likely to have a computer at home across all levels of
income and education [10].

• we demonstrate how public information for ZIP codes
can be used to annotate both web queries and URLs
with demographic features;
• we show that the user population of a large, commercial search engine is representative of the whole US
population;
• we uncover differences in search behavior across demographic segments, e.g. in the form of “representative”
queries; and

The need for demographic-aware search. Morgan and
Trauth [20] advocate for taking into account individual differences in web search. Ford, Miller and Moss [7, 9, 8] have
studied this topic extensively, emphasizing the differences
among the strategies people with different cognitive styles
use to understand information and acquire knowledge. For
a survey of works on search behavior, see [11].

• we show that using demographic information has a potential to improve state-of-the-art web search results,
especially for difficult queries, and that it leads to improvements in query suggestions.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The next
section outlines previous work related to ours. Section 3
describes how we obtained and processed the data. Section
4 discusses our methodology. Basic characteristics of the
demographics of web searches are shown in Section 5. The
impact of using demographic information on three different
application scenarios, (i) web search, (ii) automatic labeling
of URLs, and (iii) query suggestions, is quantified in Section
6. As we see our work as a first, exploratory study, we
discuss possible extensions in Section 7. The final section
presents concluding remarks.

2.

Groupization to improve search. Teevan et al. [27, 21]
investigated the benefit of using “groupization” rather than
personalization to improve web search ranking. In their
studies, done in a work environment with a total of roughly
200 participants, they showed that pooling search history information from members in the same “group”, ranging from
job function to gender, can lead to gains in normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain (DCG), in particular for grouprelated queries. Apart from the setting (work environment
with access to desktop information vs. anonymized use of
query logs), and the scale (< 1,000 users vs. > 1,000,000
users), one of the main differences to our work is that we
are also interested in descriptive results (see Section 5), as
well as applications apart from web search (see Section 6).

RELATED WORK

Inferring demographics from behavior. It is well established that the writing style of texts can be used to infer
characteristics of their authors, such as gender or age [1, 2].
Koppel et al. [23] apply this method to blog pages.
Search logs kept by search engines have been used to infer demographic characteristics of their users. Hu et al. [12]
represent users by the words in the pages they click on, and
by the output of a topic classifier on those pages. They are
able to determine gender with 80% accuracy and age (discretized in 5 ad-hoc age groups) with 50% accuracy. Jones
et al. [15] represent users by the queries written by them.
They achieve 84% accuracy on gender and 79% accuracy on
age (within ±10 years of error). In the current paper we
use an approach that is related to both: we represent users
by the queries they write and by the identity (but not the
contents) of the documents they click upon.

Conditional entropy of search logs. The question of
how much could we improve web search by knowing the
identity, or rather the IP address, of a web user, was studied
in [19]. Specifically, they measure the conditional entropy
H(U RL|Q, IP ) and compare it to H(U RL|Q). Though
these are interesting and intuitive measures to look at, there
are certain kinds of methodological problems in practice.
For example, even when tuples (U RL, Q, R) for a random
variable R with H(R) = H(I) were considered, where R
is independent of both Q and U RL, then for a fixed pair
(Q, R) the number of matching tuples (U RL, Q, R) would
be small. This means that the distribution of U RL within
a “bucket” of a given value of R will naturally look homogeneous, as the bucket is far to small to represent an adequate
sample of the random variable U RL. Therefore, conditioning on any additional variable X, be it IP or R, will always
lead to a drop of H(U RL|Q, X) compared to H(U RL|Q),
even if X is independent of both U RL and Q. This problem
could potentially be avoided by looking at the cross entropy,
i.e. by learning the distribution of the triples (U RL, Q, IP )
on one set of training data, and then using these probabilities to estimate H(U RL|Q, IP ) on a different set of test
data. However, this approach is also problematic as a single
URL in the test set, which was unseen in the training set,

Gender and internet usage. Jackson et al. [13] interviewed 600 undergraduate students and found that in general females used e-mail more and web less than males (“Women communicating and men searching” is the sub-title of
their article). Gavin et al. [14] interviewed over 600 students
and found that males used the internet in general more than
females, but found no evidence of a different pattern of communication vs search among genders. Specifically in the case
of web search, Lorigo et al. [17] use eye-tracking to uncover
differences in search strategies across different types of tasks
and among genders.

6
We use the term “African American” as a short-hand for
the term “black or African-American” as used in the official US 2000 census. See http://factfinder.census.gov/
home/en/epss/glossary_r.html#race.

5
http://adwords.google.com/support/aw/bin/answer.
py?hlrm=en&answer=33743

524

would yield an infinite entropy estimate. Ignoring any such
unseen URLs will, on the other hand, lead to a biased underestimate of the actual entropy. These issues could be addressed by comparing the the empirical conditional entropy
H(U RL|Q, IP ) to H(U RL|Q, R) where H(IP ) = H(R) for
an independent random variable R. But even then the results would remain difficult to interpret, as it is not clear, for
instance, how much a reduction in conditional entropy of 5%
would affect the web search results as the entropy might be
reduced without changing the ranking of URLs. Hence, we
preferred to look at a more tangible measure, the precision
at one. Our methodology is described in detail in Section 4.

3.

length two (input) followed by another such sequence (target). In the vast majority of cases these sequences were
actual terms, but tokens including special characters were
also kept. In all three settings, we only used (input, target)
pairs where the input had a support of at least two users,
i.e. there where at least two matching (query, URL) pairs
(after the initial screening) originating from different users.
The remaining (input, target) pairs were then labeled with
demographic information derived either directly from the
user’s profile (birth year and gender) or derived from using
demographic information pertaining to ZIP codes. Details
of this annotation process are described in the following section. The sizes of our final data sets are given in Table 1.

DATA ACQUISITION AND PROCESSING

For this study, we used the following three sources of information. First, a subset of the query log data for US search
traffic of the Yahoo! web search engine. Second, profile information (birth year, gender and ZIP code) provided by
registered users. Third, publicly accessible demographic information for US ZIP codes, obtained in the 2000 census7 ,
and joined with the other data sources on the ZIP code (explicitly provided by users).

3.1

Input
query
URL
1st term

→
→
→
→

Target
URL
query
2nd term

Pairs
479 M
588 M
509 M

Distinct
inputs
22.7 M
41.7 M
1.6 M

Distinct
users
28.3 M
29.7 M
25.3 M

Table 1: Basic statistics for the preprocessed query
log used for our study. In all cases, each input was
used by at least two distinct users.

Query Log Preprocessing
3.2

The collected data went through the following cleaning
and preprocessing steps. First, only web searches issued
between October 1, 2008 and September 30, 2009 were considered. Second, we used a subset of the queries in this time
window, sampled uniformly at random. Third, only web
searches by users logged into our services were used, and to
protect users’ privacy, all user identifiers were hashed using
a non-invertible function. Furthermore, during the whole
process, nothing was ever aggregated on a per-user level,
which is one of the advantages of our proposed approach.
Fourth, only web searches (i) originating from the USversion of the search engine, and (ii) pertaining to users
with a valid ZIP code were used.8 Fifth, queries without
clicks on URLs were discarded. We denote the pairs of query
and clicked result URL by (query, URL) and when multiple
URLs where clicked for the same query, multiple such pairs
were generated. Sixth, queries were cast to lower case but
no stemming was applied and all special characters (such as
apostrophes) were kept. Seventh, immediate, repeated duplicates of (query, URL) pairs by a single user were conflated
to a single instance. Note that we still kept repeated (query,
URL) pairs for a single user as long as there were other pairs
in between.
The final preprocessing step depended on the final analysis
intended and we considered (input, target) pairs of different
types. Concretely, in our first set of experiments we analyzed factors predicting the clicked URL (target) for a given
query (input). For our second set of experiment, we looked
at differences in how different queries (target) are used to
describe the same URL (input). For our third set of experiments, we investigated potential improvements for “suggest as you type” interfaces and we only used queries which
started with a sequence of non-white characters of minimum

Demographic Feature Extraction

Apart from the the birth year and the gender, which were
directly provided by the users, we also used the provided ZIP
code to annotate each (input, target) pair with additional
information. Concretely, we obtained the average values for
the following features for each ZIP code:
• per capita income (in 1999 US dollars) [P-c income k$],
• bachelor’s degree or higher, for population 25 years
and over [BA degree %],
• individuals below poverty level [below poverty %],
• race: white [white %], black or African American [African
American %], Asian [Asian %],
• speaks a language other than English at home, for population 5 years and over [non-English %].
In all cases, the full name is as in the official census information and, in brackets, is a shorthand used by us. For our
current study, we decided to limit ourselves to this subset of
features, but in future studies we might also include other
available data such as “mean travel time to work in minutes” or “average family size”. Note that the demographic
features are not independent and, e.g., areas where a large
percentage of the population holds a BA degree tend to have
a higher per capita income as well.
The labels applied to each (input, target) pair were discretized. For all demographic features we used quintiles: the
percentile intervals [0%, 20%], (20%, 40%], ..., (80%, 100].
E.g., a ZIP code with no more than 12.8% of its population 25 years and over holding a bachelor’s degree would
be placed in the lowest quintile for the corresponding feature and, similarly, users born after 1982 would be in the
youngest quintile as described in Table 2. Only for (i) the
gender, where only two buckets were used, and (ii) the ZIP
code itself, where we used only the two leading digits giving
a total of 99 buckets, we did not use quintiles.9 As we were
not interested in merely geographical differences, we only

7
This data is freely available at http://factfinder.
census.gov/.
8
Some of the user-provided zip codes were non existent, e.g.
12345, or they corresponded to an area without any registered inhabitants, e.g. 01244.

9

The ZIP prefix 09 refers solely to locations outside the US,
but all other prefixes from 00 to 99 were present. See http:
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ZIP_code_prefixes.

525

a geographical location.11 We did, however, not experiment
with this approach as we expect that (i) the accuracy of the
mapping is not high enough (as a “poor” ZIP code can be geographically neighboring a “rich” ZIP code) and that (ii) the
mistakes could have a systematic bias (as internet providers
could tend to have their routers in neighborhoods of a particular demographic profile). Still, if sufficiently accurate,
such mappings could be used to extend the applicability of
our work significantly by enabling a “demographic profiling”
for requests to arbitrary web servers. Information derived
from IP addresses could, when the IP-derived location differs significantly from the actual location, also be used to
remove false or outdated ZIP code information. For the
present study, we opted not to do this and rather to work
with the “raw” data instead.
Note that we do not claim that web users are always representative of their area. Trivially, any individual user could
always deviate in an arbitrary way from the “typical” resident of her neighborhood. But even the aggregated averages
might not be representative. E.g. in a poor neighborhood
the majority of its web users could be made up by people
who are, by the local standards, financially better off than
their ZIP code would imply. We are only claiming that despite such drawbacks our derived “labels” are still useful for
(i) eliciting typical differences (see Section 5) and for (ii)
predicting user behavior (see Section 6).

used the shortened ZIP code to filter out localized queries
from the lists in Table 3 but did not use them for anything
else. All percentiles were derived from (query, URL) pairs
and the corresponding buckets were used in all experiments,
even if the percentiles for other (input, target) combinations
would have differed slightly. Percentiles were computed on
a per query instance basis and not on a per-user basis.
The reason for this discretization is that we explicitly
wanted to de-personalize and de-localize our analysis. E.g.,
using the full birth year could potentially isolate a very small
user group and the same holds for using the exact average
per-capita income, which would correspond to using the full
zip code. Given even larger amount of query log data, one
could investigate the differences in web search behavior between users born in, say, 1978 and in 1977, or the differences
for the zip codes 95967 and 95969. However, one of the
strengths of our approach is exactly the fact that we work
with more abstract features, such as “very young” (youngest
20%) and “very old” (oldest 20%) or “very rich” or “very
poor”, thereby allowing a more intuitive interpretation.

Feature
P-c income k$
Bel. poverty %
BA degree %
White %
Afr. Amer. %
Asian %
Non-English %
Year of birth
Gender

20%
16.0
4.5
12.8
61.9
0.9
0.4
4.5
1956
49.7%

Query-log data
US
40% 60% 80% avg.
avg.
18.9 22.4 27.7 22.7
21.6
7.2
10.9 16.5 11.1
12.4
18.1 25.6 37.6 25.5
24.4
78.8 88.1 94.4 76.9
75.1
2.4
5.7 15.5
4.0
12.3
1.1
2.3
5.1
4.0
3.6
7.9
14.0 27.3 17.3
17.9
1966 1974 1982 1968.7
1974
female 50.3% male 49.1% vs 50.9%

4.

Table 2: Aggregated per-query demographics from
our query-log data, compared to the US average
from census data (last column).
Table 2 summarizes the per-query demographics in our
dataset, and compares them with averages in the US population, shown in the last column.10 Although the averages
agree for most features, ZIP codes with a high percentage
of African American population appear to be underrepresented in our data set. This is consistent with findings on
the “Racial Divide” [10]. For birth year, 1974 in the table for
US population, only the median and not the (lower) mean
birth year was available for the US population. As infants
are no web users the average for our data set is expected to
be below the US average.

3.3

METHODOLOGY

The main objective of our experiments is to measure how
much demographic information helps to improve the ranking
of targets, e.g. clicked URLs, for a given input, e.g. a given
query. More formally, let X, Y and D be random variables corresponding to the input, target and demographic
information respectively. Similarly, let x, y and d be actual instances of values of these random variables. In this
formulation we want to know how often the mode of the
distribution changed, i.e. how often argmaxy P (y|x, d) 6=
argmaxy P (y|x). For both conditional distributions we required the two top ranked values to correspond to distinct
probabilities, not counting cases of ties as improvements in
ranking.
In other words, we looked at the improvement of the “precision at one” (P@1), assuming that (i) the search engine
ranks according to the empirical click probability, which is
almost always the case12 , and that (ii) a click is an indication
of relevance so that P@1 is identical to the click-through-rate
for the value with the highest (empirical) click probability.
For our evaluation, we only considered cases with sufficient demographic coverage to possibly allow a re-ranking.
Concretely, we only considered inputs x with a support, in
the probabilistic sense, of at least 100 users for some some
combination (x, d) as well as at least 400 users for other values of d. See Table 6 for experimental results for this setup.
The alternative possibility of using conditional entropy [3]
was discussed in Section 2. Note that we do make use of the
conditional entropy for descriptive purposes, in particular in
Section 5, but we do not use it for performance evaluation.

Data Quality

Though it is certain that a fraction of users provided false
profile information, sometimes deliberately, and that some
of this will have escaped the test for the validity of a ZIP
code, our results (Sections 5 and 6) show that the remaining signal is still significant. In settings with poorer data
quality or without any profile information, approaches to
automatically learn a user’s profile from her search history
seem promising [15].
Instead of using the user-provided zip code, we could have
derived the ZIP code by mapping the user’s IP address to

11

See e.g.
http://www.hostip.info/ for an open
community-based project to map an IP address to geographical locations.
12
Of course, there is also a feedback loop and the highest
ranked results will get clicked more often, independent of
their relevance.

10

Details about the US averages and the definitions of the
features can be found at http://factfinder.census.gov/

526

5.

Feature
Percapita
income
k$
below
poverty
line
%
BA
degree
%

Value
81k
78k
75k
65k
26.4
25.8
24.9
24.4
55.5
54.2
53.2
52.8
White
97.1
%
96.2
96.1
95.5
African
63.8
Americ.
58.4
%
58.1
56.0
Asian
25.1
%
24.3
24.2
23.5
Non60.5
english
59.2
lang.
54.5
%
54.3
birth
www.johnshopkinshealthalerts.com
1931
year,
www.envisionreports.com/vz
1935
“old”
yahoo free bridge games
1935
bnymellon.mobular.net/bnymellon/frp 1935
birth
free teen chatrooms
1991
year,
wet seal
1991
“young”
tottaly layouts
1990
photofiltre brushes
1990
gender,
scrapbook myspace layouts
100
female
eyeshadow for brown eyes
100
%
twilight movie screensavers
100
plus size jewelry
100
gender,
2009 nfl team rankings
100
male
football big board
100
%
resharper
100
radeon x600
100

BASIC DEMOGRAPHIC DIFFERENCES

We begin by presenting partly anecdotal evidence describing how different demographic groups differ in their web
search behavior. Table 3 lists the four most “discriminating”
queries for different demographic groups, such as very young
people, or people living in predominantly “white” neighborhoods. Queries are ranked by the average feature value,
where the average is on a per-query basis; adult queries are
not included.
If this were the only ranking criterion, then the list would
be dominated by localized queries from single neighborhoods
with highly skewed demographic distributions. E.g. the
“richest” query with a support of at least 16 users would be
“paws for life” (145k$, 43 occurrences, 28 users) and the
“most educated” “www.diamondbacks.com” (73.3% BA degree, 333 occurrences, 22 users). The first refers to an animal
charity in Maryland and the second to a baseball team in
Arizona. As such examples fail to illustrate the full potential
of our approach, for Table 3 we imposed the additional filter that each query must satisfy H(short ZIP|query) ≥ 4.0,
where short ZIP refers to the first two digits of a five digit
ZIP code. Note that H(short ZIP) = 6.23 so that a query
with H(short ZIP|query) = 4.0 covers about 24.0 /26.23 =
21% of the US. Note that the entropy constraint also leads
to the requirement of at least 16 distinct users for each query.
The lists are generated such that “given the query, the demographics is determined”, and not the other way around.
Many of the queries in Table 3 agree with stereotypes.
For example, queries predominantly issued by young users
tend to be related to chat rooms, music and social networking sites. Queries which are issued exclusively by male users
in our sample are related to sports, or computer hard- and
software. Queries from areas where a language other than
English is often spoken at home, turn out to be written in
Spanish. The “s2s magazine” query, found in the list for
the feature “African American”, refers to a magazine “covering the world of black entertainment”13 . The query “tvb
series”, found in the list for the feature “Asian”, refers to a
series from a TV station based in Hong Kong.
In some cases the entries are less expected. E.g. “www.unitnet.com” is often issued as a web query from ZIP codes
where a substantial amount of individuals lives below the
poverty line, 26.4% compared to 12.4% US average. This site
is the portal page for the “directors” –salespeople– of Mary
Kay, a brand of skin care and color cosmetics which has
been criticized by its opponents as a “product-based pyramid scheme” [5]. Also unexpected is the fact that many
queries indicative for older people relate to annual shareholder meetings.
Though not our main focus, we also report on observations relating to differences in the actual search process.
Table 4 shows that there is a slight but detectable trend
for people with a university degree, or at least living in areas where this is more common, to type longer queries, to
click more often on a single result, and to click on “deeper”
URLs, meaning that they contain more “/”’s. Query length
refers to the number of sequences of non-white-spaces. URL
depth refers to the number of parts of a URL separated
by a “/” and not including the protocol. E.g. “sigir’s
homepage” has query length 2 and http://www.sigir.org/

Query
chris jordan
electric candle warmer
www.popsugar.com
ns4w.org
www.unitnet.com
slaker
kipasa
www.tokbox.com
spencer stuart executive search
insight venture partners
federal circuit
four seasons jackson hole
pulloff.com
central boiler wood furnace
firewood processors
midwest super cub
trey songz bio
def jam records address
s2s magazine
madinaonline
sina
big bang lyrics
tvb series
jay chou lyrics
mis novelas favoritas
sinonimos
juegos para baby shower
dichos mexicanos

Table 3: Some highly-discriminating queries for our
demographic features. Note that these queries,
though discriminative in terms of P (D|Q), are not
necessarily typical for a demographic group in the
sense of P (Q|D). For illustrative purposes we show
queries with a nation-wide focus by requiring a minimum entropy of 4.0 over the first two ZIP digits.

events/events-upcoming.html has URL depth 3. As for
each of the three groups in Table 4 the numbers are computed over roughly 95.8M = 0.20 × 479M (query,URL) pairs,
these differences, though small, are statistically significant at
a confidence level well below 0.001, using a t-test for equality
of means.

13

http://www.dmoz.org/Society/Ethnicity/African/
African-American/News_and_Media/Magazines/

527

% BA degree
Lowest 20%
Middle 20%
Top 20%

query length
2.25
2.28
2.32

click entropy
1.74
1.67
1.60

URL depth
1.92
1.95
1.99

the homepage of “ESL Federal Credit Union”, but for people in areas with many households where a non-English language is spoken at home, the preferred result is a page with
background information about the “English as a Secondary
Language” exam. Such examples illustrate that knowing
a particular demographic feature such as gender can potentially help to improve web search results. Here we go beyond
anecdotal evidence and quantify the attainable improvement
gains.
Applied to all queries with sufficient support (see below),
the gains in P@1 are small. This is mostly due to the fact
that the baseline system, a large commercial web search engine, already has a highly tuned ranking for common queries.
Therefore, we also looked at more difficult subsets where the
uncertainty of the clicked URL for a given query was large,
i.e. where the empirical conditional entropy H(U |Q) was
above a certain threshold. For these cases, the demographic
information is more useful to explain the diversity in the
clicked URL.

Table 4: People that are more likely to have a university degree (based on where they live), (i) type
longer queries, (ii) click more often on a single result
URL, and (iii) click on “deeper” URLs.

As can already be seen in Table 3, older people tend to be
more likely to use URLs as web queries. Out of all 15.7M
(query, URL) pairs where the query started with “www.”
29% were due to the “oldest” quintile, indicating an overrepresentation of this group for this behavior. Note that
such queries are generally more appropriately placed directly
in the URL bar of a browser. This can be seen as an indication that older people are on average less experienced with
respect to web search.
It is also informative to look at examples of queries q where
a demographic group d has an unusually high or low conditional click entropy H(U |q, d) [3]. A high click entropy can
be due to a number of reasons. It can be that the presented
web results for that query are poor and people have to try
many pages, but it can also be seen an expression of high
interest on a potentially multi-faceted topic. For example,
the query “scrapbooking” has a general click entropy of 5.4.
But for the youngest quintile, the click entropy increases
to 6.8, despite the fact that smaller buckets usually lead
to smaller entropies. The same phenomenon holds for the
oldest quintile and the query “civil war”.
Gender G
Male
Female

H(Q|G)
19.12
19.04

H(U |Q, G)
1.87
1.83

H(U |G)
19.85
19.75

§6.1
§6.1
§6.1
§6.2
§6.3

Table 6: Improvements in P@1 by exploiting demographic information, for the different applications
described in Sections 6.1-6.3 . We selected instances
(input, target) where the input has a support of at
least 100 users for some demographic feature value
d, as well as at least another 400 users for other
values of the same feature. P@1 was computed for
those instances. The baseline system ranks targets
according to P (y|x). Our system ranks them by
P (y|x, d). The last column shows the relative gain.

H(Q|U, G)
2.61
2.77

Table 5: Basic differences in how women and men
search the web. The first set of columns is computed for the (query,URL) data set and the last
two columns for the (URL,query) data set. See
Table 1. Both for queries and URLs the uncertainty/diversity for men is about 2.09 = 6.4% higher
than for women, even though they show less variability for queries used to describe clicked URLs.

6.

Only cases with sufficient support to reliably use demographic data were used for Table 6. In detail, we required at
least 100 users for a particular demographic feature value,
such as a quintile for the age, as well as at least 400 users for
other values of the same demographic feature. Even though
only less than half of the (query,URL) pairs in our original
data set (see Table 1) satisfy this criterion, we believe that
in practice this fraction can be increased by more aggressive
pre-processing of query terms, e.g. (i) by removing special characters (e.g. conflating “men’s health” and “mens
health”), (ii) by stemming (e.g. reducing “cheap flights”
and “cheap flight” to singular form) and (iii) by grouping
semantically related keys (e.g. combining “ny times” and
“new york times” into one query).

APPLICATIONS

The previous section already demonstrates that there is
indeed a difference in search and click behavior between different demographic groups. In this section, we investigate
if these differences can be exploited to improve web search
(Section 6.1), automatic labeling of URLs (Section 6.2) and
query suggestions based on query completions (Section 6.3).

6.1

Precision @ 1
Application
Instances Baseline Ours Gain
Search
207 M
.703
.713 1.4%
Search H(U |Q) ≥ 1.0 123 M
.557
.574 3.0%
Search H(U |Q) ≥ 2.0
61 M
.381
.408 7.1%
URL labeling
246 M
.461
.483 4.8%
Query completion
459 M
.250
.276 10.4%

6.2

Automatic URL Labeling

In the previous section, we looked at (query,URL) pairs
and tried to predict the URL for a given query. Here, we
look at the dual setting, i.e. given a clicked URL, can we
predict the query it was clicked for?
Looking at frequently used queries leading to a particular
URL essentially helps to give a concise description of a web
page, very similar in spirit to using tags to label a page [18].

Web Search

As we mentioned in the introduction, for the query “wagner” women predominantly click on the Wikipedia page about
the composer and men on the page of a producer of spray
brushes. Similarly, most people searching for “esl” click on

528

These descriptions might not be the same across different demographic groups. For instance, a marijuana-related page is
found by most people using the slang “weed”, whereas people
in the oldest quintile use queries with the term “marijuana”
to locate the same page. Apart from being used as labels,
the distribution of the queries gives a hint at the function
or status of a particular page. E.g., a popular site such as
Facebook has a very low entropy in terms of the queries used
to find it. As it is almost exclusively “found” by navigational
queries, it could be called a “navigational URL”, using the
terminology from [4]. The page http://www.braces.org
is generally found by the query “braces”, arguably an informational query. However, people in the highest quintile of per-capita income find it predominantly by the query
“braces.org”, a navigational query. These are some anecdotal examples illustrating differences in how people search for
the same web page. Table 6 shows that using demographic
information can lead to an improvement in automatically
deriving the query for a given URLs of 4.8% in terms of the
precision for the highest ranked query.

6.3

result snippet, such as which words were shown. Similarly,
features such as the length of a session, the dwell time on
a target page or even the percentage of typographical mistakes in queries could help to improve user modeling. We
hope that a better understanding of the differences in how
certain demographic groups interact with the web leads to
more targeted help for people in need. E.g., one could envision a different web search interface for the elderly.
As our query log data seems to be representative of the
whole US population (see Table 2), it lends itself for various large-scale sociological studies. For instance, it might
be possible to investigate different attitudes of different demographic groups, such as women vs. men, towards certain
off-line issues, e.g. child care, or online issues such as digital privacy concerns [24]. This could be done using both
the generated search volume and the type of related search
queries for the issue of interest. For instance, we observed
that men appear to be more worried about deleting their
search history while women tend to be more worried about
removing their Facebook profiles.16 Any study using query
logs would be faster, cheaper and have wider coverage than
traditional field studies. As a downside there is, on the other
hand, more noise and effects due to spam or a small set of
highly biased users have to be taken into account for such
studies.
We also deem it interesting to investigate algorithms such
as HITS [16] to propagate demographic labels back and forth
between, say, users and queries. This way a user who often
issues “educated” queries would gradually be labeled as more
and more educated, and queries issued by very educated
users would similarly become labeled as more educated. Of
course, this approach could be applied to any of the demographic features considered.
Finally, we are looking at a possibility to share our data on
a per-query basis for high-volume queries if privacy guarantees such as k-anonymity can be given [25]. Releasing query
log information aggregated for demographic groups is similar in spirit to releasing census information for a particular
ZIP code.

Query Completion

If a user starts typing the word “frontpage” on a search
engine, what is the most likely term to follow? For most
people, it is “2003”, referring to a particular version of the
Microsoft software. However, for young people it is “free”,
for African Americans it is “africa”14 , and for people with
a high level of education it is “magazine”15 . In this set of
experiments, we evaluated if demographic information could
help in predicting the second query term. We used queries
having at least two whitespace-separated terms, and having
at least two characters in each of the first two terms.
This application shows the largest gain in Table 6. This
make intuitive sense as the full query or URL already absorbs a large amount of demographic information. So the
earlier the demographic information is used in the process,
the larger its predictive value.
Recall that the percentiles used to discretize the demographic features, as described in Section 3.2, were computed
for (query,URL) pairs for the web search setting. So the
performance for the other two applications can most likely
be improved further by adapting the discretization as this
leads to a higher entropy H(D) and hence to a more discriminative predictor.

7.

8.

FUTURE EXTENSIONS

Our findings in Section 5 are more descriptive than explanatory. It would be interesting to investigate why, for example, different demographic groups prefer different result
URLs for the very frequent query “swine flu symptoms”,
where people in the lowest quintile concerning a BA degree
have http://www.medicinenet.com/swine_flu/article.htm
as the single most clicked result as opposed to http://
www.cdc.gov/h1n1flu/qa.htm for the rest of the population, even though both pages appear to be of a similar nature. Apart from doing a questionnaire-based user study,
one could look at features of the target page, such as the
number of images or the average sentence length, or of the
14

http://www.frontpageafrica.com/ is an Africa-centered
news and entertainment site.
15
http://frontpagemag.com/ is a political, conservative
magazine.

529

CONCLUSIONS

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study that
analyzes the web search behavior of different demographic
groups, such as different income ranges or different ethnic
groups, for millions of US web users. The simple but important observation that made this possible was the linkage
of census information for ZIP codes to user profiles. For
most parts, the population of search engine users appears
to be a very good approximation of the US population (see
Table 2), which highlights the potential of our approach for
sociological studies.
It should be emphasized that we could compile lists of
queries of people of Asian decent (Table 3) or point at differences in web search behavior for more educated people
(Table 4) without knowing the ethnicity or the education
level of a single person. We see this as a big advantage of
our approach over more traditional questionnaire based field
16

For the query “how to delete permanently” the mostclicked URL for women was http://www.ehow.com/how_
2315204_delete-facebook-account-permanently.html
while for men it was http://www.metacafe.com/watch/
1267808/how_to_permanently_delete_google_search_
history/.

studies, where demographic profiles need to be collected and
stored for individuals, raising privacy concerns.
With respect to the impact of our approach on the web
search results of a major web search engine, we demonstrated that a straightforward application of the demographic
information led to a 1.4% increase in P@1 averaged among
all searches, and an increase of 7.1% in P@1 for the 30% of
queries having the larger entropy in their click distribution.
See Section 6 for details. Though this might seem small,
one has to take into account that (i) the baseline system is
already highly optimized and that (ii) the full query itself
already “absorbs” part of the demographic information, as
certain user groups are less likely to issue certain queries.
Bigger gains are achievable for query completions as here
the demographic information is not yet subsumed by the
full query. Changes to interfaces of this kind also have the
advantage that users are less likely to be confused by the fact
that the ranking of results is different between, say, friends.
Although in principle our methodology is applicable to
any country, our current study is limited to the US due to
the availability of detailed government census information.
In cases where this information is not readily available, applying machine learning techniques seems viable.
Our main purpose was to point out opportunities which
arise from using demographic information and we believe
that we have barely scratched the surface. We hope to do
but also to see more work on this topic in the future.

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]
[17]

[18]

[19]

Key references: [27, 19]

9.

REFERENCES

[20]

[1] S. Argamon, M. Koppel, and G. Avneri. Routing
documents according to style. In First International
Workshop on Innovative Information Systems, 1998.
[2] S. Argamon, M. Koppel, J. Fine, and A. R. Shimoni.
Gender, genre, and writing style in formal written
texts. Text, 23, 2003.
[3] C. Arndt. Information Measures: Information and its
description in Science and Engineering. Springer,
2001.
[4] A. Broder. A taxonomy of web search. SIGIR Forum,
36(2):3–10, 2002.
[5] T. Coenen. Pink truth. http://www.pinktruth.com.
[6] M. Eirinaki and M. Vazirgiannis. Web mining for web
personalization. ACM TOIT, 3(1):1–27, 2003.
[7] N. Ford, D. Miller, and N. Moss. The role of
individual differences in Internet searching: An
empirical study. JASIST, 52(12):1049–1066, 2001.
[8] N. Ford, D. Miller, and N. Moss. Web search
strategies and human individual differences: A
combined analysis. JASIST, 56(7):757–764, 2005.
[9] N. Ford, D. Miller, and N. Moss. Web search
strategies and human individual differences: Cognitive
and demographic factors, Internet attitudes, and
approaches. JASIST, 56(7):741–756, 2005.
[10] D. L. Hoffman and T. P. Novak. Bridging the racial
divide on the internet. Science, 280:390–391, 1998.
[11] I. Hsieh-Yee. Research on Web search behavior.
Library and Information Science Research,
23(2):167–185, 2001.
[12] J. Hu, H. J. Zeng, H. Li, C. Niu, and Z. Chen.

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

530

Demographic prediction based on user’s browsing
behavior. In WWW, pages 151–160, 2007.
L. A. Jackson, K. S. Ervin, P. D. Gardner, and
N. Schmitt. Gender and the internet: Women
communicating and men searching. Sex Roles,
44(5):363–379, 2001.
R. Joiner, J. Gavin, J. Duffield, M. Brosnan,
C. Crook, A. Durndell, P. Maras, J. Miller, A. J.
Scott, and P. Lovatt. Gender, internet identification,
and internet anxiety: correlates of internet use.
Cyberpsychology & behavior : the impact of the
Internet, multimedia and virtual reality on behavior
and society, 8(4):371–378, 2005.
R. Jones, R. Kumar, B. Pang, and A. Tomkins. “I
know what you did last summer”: query logs and user
privacy. In CIKM, pages 909–914, 2007.
J. M. Kleinberg. Authoritative sources in a
hyperlinked environment. JACM, 46(5):604–632, 1999.
L. Lorigo, B. Pan, H. Hembrooke, T. Joachims,
L. Granka, and G. Gay. The influence of task and
gender on search and evaluation behavior using
google. Information Processing & Management,
42(4):1123–1131, 2006.
C. Marlow, M. Naaman, D. Boyd, and M. Davis.
Position Paper, Tagging, Taxonomy, Flickr, Article,
ToRead. In Collaborative Web Tagging Workshop,
Edinburgh, Scotland, 2006.
Q. Mei and K. Church. Entropy of search logs: how
hard is search? with personalization? with backoff? In
WSDM, pages 45–54, 2008.
A. J. Morgan and E. M. Trauth. Impact of Individual
Differences on Web Searching Performance: Issues for
Design and the Digital Divide, chapter ITB12097,
pages 261–282. Idea Group Publishing, 2006.
M. R. Morris, J. Teevan, and S. Bush. Enhancing
collaborative web search with personalization:
groupization, smart splitting, and group
hit-highlighting. In CSCW, pages 481–484, 2008.
P. Norris. Digital Divide: Civic Engagement,
Information Poverty, and the Internet Worldwide.
Cambridge University Press, 2001.
J. Schler, M. Koppel, S. Argamon, and J. Pennebaker.
Effects of age and gender on blogging. In AAAI Spring
Symposium on Computational Approaches for
Analyzing Weblogs, 2006.
K. Sheehan. An investigation of gender differences in
on-line privacy concerns and resultant behaviors.
Journal of Direct Marketing, 13(4):24–38, 2000.
L. Sweeney. k-anonymity: a model for protecting
privacy. International Journal of Uncertainty,
Fuzziness and Knowledge-Based Systems,
10(5):557–570, 2002.
J. Teevan, S. T. Dumais, and E. Horvitz. Personalizing
search via automated analysis of interests and
activities. In SIGIR, pages 449–456, 2005.
J. Teevan, M. R. Morris, and S. Bush. Discovering and
using groups to improve personalized search. In
WSDM, pages 15–24, 2009.

