iCollaborate : Harvesting Value from Enterprise Web Usage
Ajinkya Kale† , Thomas Burris¶ , Bhavesh Shah† , T L Prasanna Venkatesan† ,
Lakshmanan Velusamy† , Manish Gupta§ , and Melania Degerattu‡
†

India Software Lab, IBM India Pvt. Ltd., ¶ CIO Innovation Initiatives, IBM India Pvt. Ltd.,
§
India Research Lab, IBM India Pvt. Ltd., ‡ GWWPE, CIO Office, IBM Corp.

{ajinkyakale, thomburris, bhaveshshah, prasannav, lakshmanan.v,
gmanish}@in.ibm.com, mdegera@us.ibm.com
public web, where user identity, trust, and governance are
issues. Second, the extent to which they are aimed at providing recommended content and views into browsing trends
are challenged by the lack of tightly organized, closed communities. Other utilities like Delicious, StumbleUpon usually need an explicit user actions to mark the page on the
user profile and to rate the page.
Crowd Intelligence in an Enterprise : The ideal community for web data mining and services is an enterprise. In
an enterprise, user identity and trust can be assured. The
sub-net of web pages that employees use is, by definition, focused on the mission and business of the enterprise. These
user groups can be utilized to enhance the web browsing
knowledge of the enterprise as a whole.
Solution outline : iCollaborate specifically targets a community of enterprise employees. We track user’s web interaction via a browser plugin using a page usage score algorithm to determine the extent to which an employee actually
used the page. This data, along with data derived from the
content of the pages themselves, is used to create clusters
of ‘similar’ users and content. We map users into two different cluster groups based on their long term interest ie
browsing history and their short term interests ie their recent web browsing sessions. These clusters are used to provide real-time people and content recommendations. Using a
combination of Locality Sensitive Hashing[1], Min-hash and
Co-Visitation techniques we bind content-based and collaborative filtering for common interest clustering of users and
content. These services derived from this analysis is a direct
function of the coherence of the community from which it
is derived. To an enterprise, seeking competitive advantage
by maximizing the use of the information at its disposal, a
system like iCollaborate can provide much value.

Figure 1: A screenshot of iCollaborate in action
Categories and Subject Descriptors : H.3.3 [Information storage and retrieval]Information filtering
General Terms : Algorithms
Keywords : Enterprise Social Data, Social browsing

1.

INTRODUCTION

We are in a phase of ‘Participatory Web’ in which users
‘add value’ to the information on the web by publishing,
tagging and sharing. The Participatory Web has enormous
potential for an enterprise because unlike the users of the
internet an enterprise is a community that shares common
goals, assumptions, vocabulary and interest and has reliable user identification and mutual trust along with a central governance and incentives to collaborate. Everyday, the
employees of an organization locate content relevant to their
work on the web. Finding this information takes time, expertise and creativity, which costs an organization money.
That is, the web pages employees find are knowledge assets owned by the enterprise. This investment in web-based
knowledge assets is lost every time the enterprise fails to
capture and reuse them. iCollaborate is tooled to capture
user’s web interaction, persist and analyze it, and feed that
interaction back into the community - the enterprise.
Pain points : Current web applications that explicitly
monitor web browsing activity, such as eyebrowse[2], are
limited by a number of factors. First, they exist out on the

2. REFERENCES
[1] P. Indyk, R. Motwani. Approximate Nearest Neighbor:
Towards Removing the Curse of Dimensionality. In
Proc. of the 30th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory
of Computing, 1998, pp. 604-613.
[2] B. Moore, M. V. Kleek, D. Karger, eyebrowse :
http://eyebrowse.csail.mit.edu/

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

699

