Exploring Desktop Resources Based on User
Activity Analysis
Yukun Li, Xiangyu Zhang and Xiaofeng Meng
School of information, Renmin University of China
Beijing, China

liyukun@ruc.edu.cn, zhangxy@live.com,
xfmeng@ruc.edu.cn

ABSTRACT
Relocation in personal desktop resources is an interesting
and promising research topic. This demonstration illustrates
a new perspective in exploring desktop resources to help
users re-find expected data resources more effectively. Different from existing works, our prototype OrientSpace has
two features: automatically extract and maintain user tasks
to support task-based exploration, and support vague search
by exploiting associations between desktop resources.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.5.2 [User Interfaces]:Prototyping.
Figure 1: System Interface

General Terms: Design, Human Factors, Management.
Keywords: Desktop resources, Task exploration, Association exploration.

1.

and analyzing user operations. By clicking one of the tasks,
user will get the documents related to this task. This would
be especially useful for those people who don’t spend enough
time in organizing their documents.
Association-based Resource Exploration. The right
area of figure 1 represents an association graph of documents
and tasks. This is very useful when a user can not remember the right keyword and directory for the desired file, but
can remember some information about other files with relation to it. As shown in figure 1, the user expects to find file
A, and can not remember its keywords and directory, but
can remember a keyword ”extraction” of another document
B associated to a same task ”SIGIR 2010” with the desired
file A. She can first find B by keyword ”extraction”, then
relocate file A by this association-based explorer. Currently
supported associations by OrientSpace include: have common keywords, belong to the same task, attached to email
and so on.

INTRODUCTION

Nowadays, the most widely used approaches to explore
desktop resources is by Windows Resource Explorer(WRE)
and Desktop Search Tools(DST). WRE demands users to
recall precise path information, and DST demands users to
remember exact key words. However, there’re many occasions when users can not remember the promising keywords
or pathes. In fact, users often expect to relocate desktop
resources based on user tasks( [1],etc). Some existing works
make good efforts to tackle this problem, like prototype
Haystack [2] and Phlat [3]. But these works paid little attention to the role of user activities for personal data relocation.
This demonstration is try to overcome the disadvantages of
the extisting works, and help users to explorer personal desktop resources based user activities and associations between
desktop resources.

2.

3. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

SYSTEM OVERVIEW

This research was partially supported by the grants from
the National High-Tech Research and Development Plan of
China (No:2007AA01Z155).

Figure 1 shows the interface of OrientSpace system. It
has two major features: task-based resources exploration
and association-based resources exploration.
Task-based Resource Exploration. In this work we define each task as a set of desktop files related to generating a
special personal document, and identify each task based on
analyzing user access sequential list on desktop resources.
The left area of figure 1 shows a list of user tasks ranked by
time, which are extracted automatically through detecting

4. REFERENCES
[1] P. Vakkari. Task based information searching. In:
Cronin, B. (Ed.) [ARIST 37]: 413-464, 2003.
[2] D.R. Karger et al. Haystack: A General-Purpose
Information Management Tool for End Users Based on
Semistructured Data, CIDR 2005:13-26.
[3] E. Cutrell et al. Fast, flexible filtering with phlat
–Personal Search and Organization Made Easy. CHI
2006:261-270.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

700

