Finding and Filtering Information for Children
Desmond Elliott, Richard Glassey, Tamara Polajnar, Leif Azzopardi
Information Retrieval Group, Department of Computing Science
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, G12 8QQ

{delliott, rjg, tamara, leif}@dcs.gla.ac.uk

Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search and Retrieval - Information Filtering

Maddie's Favourite Stuff
General

General Terms: Design, Human Factors
Keywords: Information Filtering, Children

Extended Abstract

1a

Children face several challenges when using information access systems. These include formulating queries, judging
the relevance of documents, and focusing attention on interface cues, such as query suggestions, while typing queries
[3]. It has also been shown that children want a personalised
Web experience and prefer content presented to them that
matches their long-term entertainment and education needs
[2]. To this end, we have developed an interaction-based
information filtering system to address these challenges.
The system, a prototype developed within the PuppyIR
project [1], is initialised by supplying a list of manually selected and vetted syndication feeds. We use sources such
as the BBC and other reputable providers to overcome the
problem of content moderation1 . Interaction with the system facilitates topic discovery over time; however, a default
set of topics are defined to deal with the cold-start problem.
Feeds are periodically fetched and split into individual feed
entries, which are checked against existing content to ensure
they are unique. Finally, documents are filtered for a topic
using the Okapi BM25 scoring function with the topic definition acting as a query. Filtered documents are presented
in reverse chronological order and the document-query score
is used to create visual cues in the presentation of results.
The system interface is shown in Figure 1. The set of
default topics are shown above the set of discovered topics
(1a). In this example, the Science topic has been selected
(1b) and the list of documents titles filtered for this topic
are presented to the child. The amount of space used in
presenting a title indicates the relevance of a document, as
shown by comparing a somewhat relevant document (2a)
and a strongly relevant document (2b). Children are also
able to manually define a new topic (3), if needed, and personalise the interface (4), such as the customizing the title,
colour scheme and style.

Latest News
Sport
Entertainment
Science ! 1b

Maddie's
Twilight
Figure Skating

4

Geese tagged and tracked to assess wind
farm impacts

2a

New human-like
species' revealed

2b

Venus 'still volcanically active'

Scientists find the first
animals able to live
without oxygen
In pictures: Arctic foxes and their long
distance journeys

3

Add Topic

'First image' of star's
eclipse

Figure 1: Interface showing default and personalised
filters, variable title size and user personalisation
When a child clicks on the an item in the list, for example (2b), the remainder of the document is presented
(not shown). This interaction is used to update the system’s knowledge about the child’s interests. The history of
interaction actions is subsequently used to learn the set of
discovered topics (1a), to provide a personalised experience.
The interaction-based information filtering system presented offers a novel approach to the challenges faced by
children. By inferring the topics of interest over time, instead of relying on explicit queries, query formulation becomes optional. The subsequent reduction in queries allows
the child to fully focus their attention upon the information
presented. Finally, by varying the amount of space used for
each document title, relevance cues are clearly expressed in
a simple and intuitive manner.
Acknowledgements: PuppyIR is funded by the EC’s
FP7 2007-2013 under grant agreement no. 231507.

1.

REFERENCES

[1] L. Azzopardi, R. Glassey, M. Lalmas, T. Polajnar, and
I. Ruthven. PuppyIR: Designing an OS Framework for
Interactive Information Services for Children. In Proc. of the
3rd HCIR Workshop, pages 26–30, 2009.
[2] D. Bilal. Draw and tell: Children as designers of web interfaces.
American Soc for Info Sci and Tech, 40(1):135–141, 2003.
[3] H. E. Jochmann-Mannak, T. W. C. Huibers, and T. J. M.
Sanders. Children’s IR. In Procs. of FDIA, pages 64–72, 2008.

1

This decision allows us to focus on filtering documents from the
syndication feeds according to a set of topics.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

702

