Automatic Content Linking: Speech-based Just-in-time
Retrieval for Multimedia Archives
Andrei Popescu-Belis

Jonathan Kilgour

Peter Poller

Idiap Research Institute
Rue Marconi 19, BP 592
1920 Martigny, Switzerland

HCRC, Univ. of Edinburgh
10 Crichton Street
Edinburgh EH89AB, Scotland

DFKI GmbH
Stuhlsatzenhausweg 3
66123 Saarbrücken, Germany

apbelis@idiap.ch
Alexandre Nanchen

jonathan@inf.ed.ac.uk
Erik Boertjes

peter.poller@dfki.de
Joost de Wit

Idiap Research Institute
Rue Marconi 19, BP 592
1920 Martigny, Switzerland

TNO ICT
Brassersplein 2
2612 Delft, The Netherlands

TNO ICT
Brassersplein 2
2612 Delft, The Netherlands

ananchen@idiap.ch

erik.boertjes@tno.nl

ABSTRACT

keywords are spotted. Finally, queries are constructed, with
boosted keywords. The search results represent the content
linked to current conversations. These are obtained for each
time frame, and smoothed in time using a persistence mechanism. Web queries are handed to the Google API, possibly
restricted to a single website such as Wikipedia.
The modular User Interface can display its widgets sideby-side (in full screen mode) or as superposed tabs (in minimized mode). The widgets show, respectively, the list of
recognized words with highlighted keywords, a separate tag
cloud reflecting the importance of keywords, the five most
relevant document names retrieved during the latest time
interval, as well as the titles of the five most relevant web
pages. Hovering over result names provides a brief overview
of the respective documents, showing metadata and excerpts
with highlighted retrieval terms. Clicking on a result name
opens the corresponding document with an adapted viewer,
such as a meeting browser for snippets of past meetings.

The Automatic Content Linking Device monitors a conversation and uses automatically recognized words to retrieve
documents that are of potential use to the participants.
The document set includes project related reports or emails,
transcribed snippets of past meetings, and websites. Retrieval results are displayed at regular intervals.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.3.3 [Information Storage & Retrieval]: Information Search & Retrieval
General Terms: Design, Human factors

1.

INTRODUCTION

The availability of recording devices facilitates the acquisition of multimedia data repositories for use in personal or
corporate contexts. Meeting participants may talk about
items contained in such repositories, but searching the data
requires more time than they can afford to spend during
their discussion. We have designed the Automatic Content
Linking Device (ACLD), a retrieval system inspired by the
‘query-free’ [1] and ‘just-in-time’ [2] approaches, using automatic speech recognition (ASR). Its primary use is during
live meetings, but it can also be demonstrated with a single
speaker using a laptop computer, or over previously recorded
material.

2.

joost.dewit@tno.nl

3.

FEEDBACK AND EVALUATION

Performance evaluation was attempted by enacting meetings and measuring the ACLD effect on the outcome, but
the method was too costly. The usability of the GUI was
tested with ten users, reaching ca. 70% satisfaction. Two
focus groups discussed the ACLD, and found the general
concept useful. The ACLD was also demonstrated to about
30 potential industrial partners, with positive verbal evaluation and suggestions for future improvement. Many suggestions were already implemented, such as linking content on
demand, or highlighting keywords found in documents.

ARCHITECTURE

The main components of the ACLD are the following ones.
The Document Bank Creator is run before a meeting to create or update the repository that will be searched during
the meeting. Text versions of documents are generated for
indexing, and meaningful metadata is added. One-minute
snippets of previous meetings, represented by their ASR
transcript, are also included. All “documents” are indexed
using the Apache Lucene open-source software. The Query
Aggregator processes the words spoken by the participants,
found by the ASR component, in batches of fixed duration
or length. The stopwords are filtered out and pre-specified

4.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The ACLD was supported by the EU AMIDA Integrated
Project FP6-0033812, and by the Swiss IM2 NCCR.

5.

REFERENCES

[1] P. E. Hart and J. Graham. Query-free information retrieval.
IEEE Expert: Intelligent Systems and Their Applications,
12(5):32–37, 1997.
[2] B. J. Rhodes and P. Maes. Just-in-time information retrieval
agents. IBM Systems Journal, 39(3-4):685–704, 2000.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

703

