Si-Fi: Interactive Similar Item Finder
Inbeom Hwang1 , Minsuk Kahng1 , Sung Eun Park1 , Jinwook Seo2 , and Sang-goo Lee1
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Seoul National University
Seoul 151-742, Republic of Korea
1

{inbeom,minsuk,separk1031,sglee}@europa.snu.ac.kr, 2 jwseo@cse.snu.ac.kr

Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.3 Information
Storage and Retrieval: On-line Information Services
General Terms: Design, Human Factors
Keywords: Interactive Search, Hierarchical Clustering

1.

EXTENDED ABSTRACT

Many recommender systems retrieve items similar to the
given one. Similar items can be numerous items in the wide
range of their properties, since, in users’ point of view, similarity can be any relationship that the given item has with
other ones. Despite of this fact, top-k retrieval scheme that
most information retrieval (IR) systems employ returns k
items whose similarity score computed by the system is high
regardless of users’ wide range of current interest.
Let us say there is a user wants to ﬁnd out artists similar to
her favorite British Pop artist. Most IR systems adopting
traditional top-k retrieval scheme would use the artist as
a query and return a list of similar items. The result list
may include almost identical British Pop artists on the top,
with hundreds of related items below them. It would not be
problematic when she likes the top-ranked items, but users
are not always satisﬁed with them. She may know almost
all of top-ranked artists, or she may want to try another
genre of music related with her favorite one, by ﬁltering out
British Pop artists. Her needs could not be satisﬁed with
the plain approach. As some previous work points out, plain
top-k list should be reﬁned to satisfy more.
The biggest diﬃculty lies in that single measurement of
similarity does not reveal the taste of users in most cases,
and even it is hard to know what the users’ taste is, which
is one of the goals for this kind of retrieval. Content-based
methods can be used to ﬁnd users’ preferred properties for
items. But suggestions from content-based systems often
annoy users with their huge size. Some work tried to overcome this by adding interactive exploration methods to IR
systems. Google image swirl1 and [1] use iterative clustering
of returned set of items to make structure of them and to
give diversiﬁed choices to users. But their approach is not
well-suited for similar item ﬁnding, because it runs based
on users’ clear interest. We focus on situations where users’
interest is hard to be determined.
To overcome the stated problem, we present Si-Fi (Similar
1

Figure 1: Si-Fi interface overview
Item Finder, http://vega.snu.ac.kr/sifi/). As a visual
aid, it helps users to ﬁnd items they like more intuitively. It
exploits explorative querying method and visualizes its exploration in interactive manner. Si-Fi is ﬂexible enough to
be applied to any set of items having weighted links describing similarity between all pairs of them. Using the similarity
scores, it builds clusters in hierarchy to show structured relationship among items in the domain and lets users to browse
inside the hierarchy. The problem of matching similarity
scores and users’ taste can be solved in users’ hand, because
users implicitly adjust their desired level of similarity during
their browsing.
Si-Fi tries to maximize the browsing capability with several visualization techniques. Dynamic ﬁltering method enables users to ﬁlter out uninteresting items. Along with
clusters overview, it helps users to determine their direction
of navigation. In addition, history browsing feature guides
them not to be lost in the graph.
With visual assistances, Si-Fi becomes a useful tool for
similar item retrieving. Making use of this tool, users are
able to ﬁnd their desired items in more clear way.

2. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research was supported by the MKE(The Ministry of
Knowledge Economy), Korea, under the ITRC(Information
Technology Research Center) support program supervised
by the NIPA(National IT Industry Promotion Agency). (grant
number NIPA-2010-C1090-1031-0002)

3. REFERENCES

Google image swirl, http://image-swirl.googlelabs.com/

[1] B. Liu and H. V. Jagadish. Using trees to depict a
forest. PVLDB, 2(1):133–144, 2009.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

704

