Suggesting Related Topics in Web Search
Santosh Raju

Shaishav Kumar

Raghavendra Udupa

Microsoft Research India,
Bangalore 560080, India

Microsoft Research India,
Bangalore 560080, India

Microsoft Research India,
Bangalore 560080, India

t-sanv@microsoft.com

v-shaisk@microsoft.com

raghavu@microsoft.com

ABSTRACT
Suggesting topics that are related to user’s goal or interest
is very important in web search. However, search engines
today focus on suggesting mainly reformulations and lexical
variants of the query mined from query logs. In this demonstration, we show a system that can suggest related topics
for a query based on the top search results for the query. It
can help users in exploring the topics related to their information need. The topic suggestion system can be integrated
with any search engine or it can be easily installed on the
client machine as a browser plugin.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.3.1 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Content Analysis and Indexing
General Terms: Algorithms, Experimentation

1.

SYSTEM OVERVIEW

Web search engine users often seek information on a topic
and issue queries to explore the topic. Web directories such
as Open Directory allow the user to explore topics in the
directory and locate pages that answers his/her information
need. However, current web search engines such as Google,
Bing and Yahoo ignore topic exploration and focus on directing the user to the most relevant page for his information
need. There have been several research eﬀorts dedicated to
suggesting Related Searches for a query which are primarily
reformulations of the query or lexical variants [1, 2]. However, there is no system which gives topic suggestions for a
query and allows the user to explore the topics related to
his information need.
This demonstration introduces MSRI Topic Explorer ,
a system that suggests topics related to the query from the
point of view of topic exploration. Speciﬁcally, the system
provides the following functionalities for topic exploration:

Figure 1: Two Groups of Topics for the query
Pathology suggested by “MSRI Topic Explorer”.
search results clustering systems like Clusty 1 where result pages for a query are clustered. Our system ﬁnds
groups of topic suggestions.
Figure 1 illustrates the exemplary results highlighting the
functionalities of the system.

2.

• Contextual Topic Suggestions: For a user query,
it leverages the content of the top results of the search
engine for the query and dynamically generates a set
of topics related to the query for exploration.

REFERENCES

[1] Z. Zhang and O. Nasraoui, Mining search engine query
logs for query recommendation. In Proceedings of the
Thirteenth International World Wide Web Conference
(WWW-2006)
[2] Jones, Rosie and Rey, Benjamin and Madani, Omid
and Greiner, Wiley, Generating query substitutions. In
Proceedings of the Thirteenth International World Wide
Web Conference (WWW-2006)

• Topic Groups: If the query is ambiguous or multifaceted like “Pathology”, the system identiﬁes the multiple senses of the query (ﬁrst, a medical specialty and
second, a movie) and suggests a separate set of topics for each sense. This is diﬀerent from the existing
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

1

705

http://clusty.com/

