Agro-gator: Digesting Experts, Logs, and N-grams
Michael Huggett

iLab @ Dalhousie University
6100 University Avenue
Halifax, Canada
1 902 494 8392

mhuggett@dal.ca

ABSTRACT

As research includes more and larger user studies, a significant
problem lies in combining the many types of data files into a
single table suitable for analysis by common statistical tools.

…

We have developed a data-aggregation tool that combines user
logs, expert scoring, and task/session attributes. The tool also
integrates the n-grams derived from a given sequence of actions in
the user tasks. The tool provides a GUI for quick and easy
configuration.

Categories and Subject Descriptors

H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]:
Interfaces – evaluation/methodology, prototyping

Agro‐gator
Configuration
User Logs

…

Expert Scores

…

Task Attributes

Data Table

Figure 1. Multiple input files are configured into a single
ouput file suitable for statistical analysis.

User

Researchers configure the Agro-gator by selecting desired
columns and data worksheets from the input files. A GUI allows
them (1) to link user responses to an expert’s “correct” answers,
(2) to link the user’s tasks to the task’s attributes (e.g. its type and
structure), and (3) to choose the stream of user actions that will be
fragmented into n-grams.

General Terms

Measurement, Experimentation, Human Factors, Standardization

Keywords

User studies, data analysis, data aggregation, n-gram analysis.

1. USER DATA AGGREGATION

The n-grams can be filtered to accept or ignore specific actions,
and n-gram lengths can be limited to minimum and maximum
values, up to the total length of the activity stream. By default, all
possible n-grams of length 1..n are generated.

Combining myriad data sources into a coherent, analyzable set is
a non-trivial feat. User logs record multiple simultaneous events,
expert scoring defines a “golden set” of correct answers for task
problems, and the assigned tasks need to be differentiated by their
attributes. We see the goal of data aggregation as combining these
factors into a single table prior to correlational analysis.

Output is in table format. The default format displays in each row
the task and user IDs, the task attributes, the user score for the
task, the count per action type, user demographic data, pre- and
post-questionnaire data, and one unique n-gram per line along
with its attributes (such as length and type). Thus per user task,
there will be as many output lines as there are n-grams.
Researchers can configure the tool to include or omit any of these
facets in the output.

By contrast, the best-known aggregation tools are of a different
scope and character. The qualitative Nvivo package [1] allows
users to tag, annotate and link text, video, and sound data in a
drag-and-drop interface; the data can thereafter be explored using
search and query engines. Similarly, the ATLAS.ti package [2]
lets users label and search through complex phenomena hidden in
text and multimedia.

The resulting table can be used as input to large-data statistical
analysis packages (e.g. R, SAP, SPSS).This is not a revolutionary
tool, but we expect it to be useful.

2. N-GRAM PROCESSING

N-grams of user activity streams may contain interesting
behaviour patterns that can be tied to successful and unsuccessful
task performance. To date, studies using n-grams have limited the
n-gram lengths: both [3] and [4] limited n-grams to 5 or 6
symbols in length. One goal of our tool is to allow researchers to
generate easily all n-grams in a range of desired lengths, for
finding correlations of user-action patterns to task attributes.

4. REFERENCES

[1] Nvivo, http://www.qsrinternational.com/products_nvivo.aspx,
2010.
[2] ATLAS.ti, http://www.atlasti.com/ . 2010.
[3] Lin, J. and Wilbur, J. 2009. Modeling actions of PubMed
users with n-gram language models. Information Retrieval
(12), 487-503.

3. OVERVIEW OF THE PROTOTYPE

The tool currently supports input and output file types in commaand tab-separated value (CSV, TSV), and Excel formats.

[4] Tague-Sutcliffe, J. and Toms, E. 1995. Information system
design via the quantitative analysis of user transaction logs.
5th International Conference on Scientometrics and
Infometrics.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

706

