Medical Search and Classification Tools for
Recommendation
1

Jimmy Xiangji Huang1 , Aijun An2 , Qinmin Hu1,2

Information Retrieval and Knowledge Management Lab, York University, Toronto, Canada
2
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, York University, Toronto, Canada

jhuang@yorku.ca, {aan, vhu}@cse.yorku.ca
Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.3.3 Information
SystemsInformation Retrieval

working in the fields. System evaluations have been conducted and the performance results have been shown to be
promising.

General Terms: Design

2. AN INTEGRATED GUI-BASED TOOL

Keywords: Medical Search, Classification, EMR, Recommendation

1.

A GUI-based interface is designed and implemented for
the text-analytics tool under a point-and-click environment.
Clicking the button of ICES search tool, we can get the
starting to the free-text search as shown in Figure 1. The
free-text search tool is designed to retrieve records based on
keywords such as “MI”. The search results display the key
sentences in the medical records containing the keywords.
Clicking the button of ICES classification tool, we can use
three classification tools summarize the records of each patient in Figure 2. Three classification tools classify patients
based on their likelihoods of having MI or hypertension, or
on their smoking status.

EXTENDED ABSTRACT

As an increasing number of medical professionals move
their patients’ records from paper to computer, enormous
amounts of electronic medical records (EMR) have become
available for medical research. Some of the EMR data are
well-structured, for which traditional database management
systems can provide effective retrieval and management functions. However, most of the EMR data (such as progress
notes and consultation letters) are in free text formats. How
to effectively and efficiently retrieve and discover useful information from the vast amount of such semi-structured
data is a challenge faced by medical professionals. Without proper tools, the rich information and knowledge buried
in the medical health records are unavailable for clinical research and decision-making.
The objective of our research is to develop text analytics tools that are capable of parsing clinical medical data
so that predefined search subjects that correspond to a list
of medical diagnoses can be extracted. In addition to this
particular core functionality, it is also desired that several
important assets should be present within the text-analytics
tools in order to improve its overall ability to be used as recommendation tools.
In this research, we work with research scientists at the
Institute for Clinical Evaluative Sciences (ICES) in Toronto
and examine a number of techniques for structuring and processing free text documents in order to effectively and efficiently search and analyze vast amount of medical records.
We implement several powerful medical text analytics tools
for clinical data searching and classification. For data classification, our tools sort through a great amount of patient
records to identify the likelihood of a patient having myocardial infarction (MI) or hypertension (HTN), and classify the patients accordingly. Our tools can also identify the
likelihood of a patient being a smoker, previous smoker or
non-smoker based on the text data of medical records. All
the algorithms and domain knowledge implemented in these
tools were provided by medical doctors and domain experts

Figure 1: ICES Search Tool

Figure 2: ICES Classification Tool

3. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research is supported in part by research grants from
the Institute for Clinical Evaluative Sciences, Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) and Ontario Ministry of
Research & Innovation (MRI).

Copyright is held by the author/owner.
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

707

