Multilingual People Search
Shaishav Kumar

Raghavendra Udupa

Microsoft Research India
Bangalore - 560080, India

Microsoft Research India
Bangalore - 560080, India

v-shaisk@microsoft.com

raghavu@microsoft.com

ABSTRACT
People Search is an important search service with multiple
applications (eg. looking up a friend on Facebook, finding
colleagues in corporate email directories etc). With the proportion of non-English users on a steady rise, people search
services are being used by users from diverse language demographics. Users may issue name search queries against
these directories in languages other than the language of
the directory, in which case the present monolingual name
search approaches will not work. In this demo, we present
a Multilingual People Search system capable of performing
fast name lookups on large user directories, independent of
the directory language. Our system has applications in areas
like social networking, enterprise search and email address
book search.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search and Retrieval
General Terms: Algorithms, Experimentation, Languages

1.

Figure 1: Multilingual Email Address Book Search
and Multilingual Wikipedia Search showing results
for the user query Albert Einstein (typed in English)

SYSTEM OVERVIEW

People Search is a well studied problem, but not in a
multilingual setting. One could adapt existing monolingual
sytems to the multilingual environment by transliterating
user queries to the language of the directory. However, such
a system would have low accuracy and high response time
because of the intermediate transliteration step making it
impractical.
We tackle the problem by representing names using a language/script independent representation learned by employing Machine Learning techniques [1],[2]. The key idea is
to treat names written in two languages/scripts as parallel
views of the same semantic object. Given a training data
set consisting of parallel name tokens in two languages, we
employ Cannonical Correlation Analysis to learn hash functions for each language. These hash functions are used for
indexing the directories. Subsequently, when performing a
name search, the query is hashed and matching results are
retrieved from the directory. The compact and computer
friendly hash codes make indexing large directories possible and offer efficient retrieval performance even on simple
commodity hardware.
Some key advantages of our system are:

rently supported languages are English, Russian, Hebrew, Hindi, Tamil, Telugu, Kannada and Bengali.
Other languages can be easily supported.
• Fast Response Time and Scalability : The use
of hash codes offers fast response time with minimal
resource requirement making it highly scalable.
We have evaluated our system against a state-of-the-art
transliteration based baseline and achieved substantially better accuracy and response time figures [1].
The demo will showcase Multilingual Email Address Book
Search and Multilingual Wikipedia People Search. Figure 1
shows snapshots of both applications. Results are shown for
the query Albert Einstein in English, fetched from a Russian
directory in the first case and from a list of Russian wikipedia
titles in the second.

2.

REFERENCES

[1] R. Udupa and M. Khapra. Improving the multilingual
user experience of wikipedia using cross-language name
search. In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2010.
[2] R. Udupa and M. Khapra. Transliteration equivalence
using canonical correlation analysis. In Proceedings of
ECIR 2010.

• Data driven: Requires small training data. Cur-

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

708

