A Method to Automatically Construct a User Knowledge
Model in a Forum Environment
Ahmad Kardan

Mehdi Garakani

Bamdad Bahrani

Advanced E-Learning
Technology Lab
Amirkabir University of Technology
Tehran, Iran

Advanced E-Learning
Technology Lab
Amirkabir University of Technology
Tehran, Iran

Advanced E-Learning
Technology Lab
Amirkabir University of Technology
Tehran, Iran

aakardan@aut.ac.ir

garakani@aut.ac.ir

bamdad.bahrani@aut.ac.ir

ABSTRACT

2. RELATED WORK

Having a mechanism to validate the opinions and to identify
experts in a forum could help people to favor one opinion against
another. To achieve this, some solutions have already been
introduced, including social network analysis techniques and
reputation modeling. However, neither of these solutions
considers the users’ knowledge to identify an expert. In this paper,
a novel method is proposed which estimates users’ knowledge
based on the forum itself, and identifies the possible areas of
expertise associated with each user.

Expert finding roles as the motivation and objective of this
paper, while concept map scoring is a related research area which
serves as the general idea for assessing one’s knowledge. Expert
finding refers to studies aiming at finding people with relevant
expertise. There are two main approaches to finding experts. The
first approach has focused on social network analysis. Another
approach to expert finding is to rank people within an
organization based on their level of expertise about a given topic.
Concept map is a graphical knowledge representation method
which includes some nodes indicating concepts and labeled links
describing the relationship between two concepts [2]. Concept
mapping can also be used as an assessment method for eliciting
the conceptual knowledge that a student holds in a subject domain
[4]. In order to score a concept map, a criterion map (also called a
reference map) is required. Comparing specific features of a given
map with the same features in the criterion map, a score would be
computed. There are different concept map scoring methods
including measuring structural similarity, exact node matching
and exact propositional matching [4]. In [3] a method is proposed
to automatically generate students’ conceptual models from
answers in plain text based on the frequency of a term used by a
learner. In [5] three attributes are presented in order to score a
concept map. 1) The volume of a concept map that refers to the
total number of relations used in the learners’ concept map. 2)
The ‘ruggedness’, which is the division of a concept map into unconnected sub-maps. 3) The amount of accurate propositions in
relation to the volume. A low ruggedness indicates that the
knowledge structure is consistent.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search
and Retrieval – search process; H.3.4 [Information Storage and
Retrieval]: Systems and Software user profiles and alert services.

General Terms
Algorithms, Measurement, Performance, Experimentation

Keywords
Expert finding, Knowledge model, Forum, Information retrieval

1. INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, forums are known as a great source of raw
information and having them analyzed could benefit both
educational and commercial sectors. One problem with forums is
how someone could be convinced during the discussion and how
the convergence is made. Another problem arises when the
discussion is over, and someone needs to make a decision to favor
one opinion against another. These issues have been partially
dealt with using expert finding systems and reputation models.
User knowledge appears to be the most important feature of a
user that should be considered to solve the mentioned issues in
forums. Therefore, a knowledge model of a participant is needed.
A knowledge model could be designed and created in several
ways which are discussed in detail in [1]. In this paper we propose
a novel method to estimate user knowledge in forums. By using
the proposed method, the knowledge level of every participant in
each fragment of the domain knowledge would be estimated. This
method uses a concept map or related ontology as the structural
knowledge model of a domain.

3. SOLUTION
The assumption of the proposed method is that the conceptual
network for the domain of a forum should exist to serve as the
structural knowledge model of the domain. A fragment of the
domain knowledge or simply a specific subject matter usually
consists of a subset of interrelated concepts in a conceptual
network. The fragments could be considered as fixed subsets or
defined dynamically when needed based on a risen topic.
Considering reviewed related works, the following three
parameters would be leveraged to estimate the knowledge of a
user in each fragment of the domain model resulting in an
estimation of the user knowledge model extracted from a
particular forum:
1. The number of times a concept in the conceptual
network is used in the posts associated to the user.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

717

2.
3.

detail including many nodes, the more accurate the result of
Formula 1 is. Furthermore, Formula 1 could be applied on the
whole knowledge structure if the domain knowledge is considered
as a total fragment. In this case, connected components will
present the areas where a user is likely to be an expert in. Those
areas could then be reported as expertise areas pertaining to the
user.
Java Forum (http://forums.sun.com/index.jspa) is a well-known
forum where a wide range of users share and discuss issues related
to Java. We chose Java forum to evaluate our proposed method
because of the following reasons: 1) Java technology concept map
is provided by Sun. We used this concept map with a little
modification as the domain knowledge structure. 2) A program
called Duke Stars is being run by Java Forum. To evaluate the
proposed method, we chose one hundred members whose earned
Duke Stars were close enough from Java Forum. We applied the
proposed method to the posts associated to each selected users.
We analyzed their level of expertise using Formula 1 considering
the whole Java concept map.
The Spearman rank correlation between the ranking based on
Duke Stars and the ranking made using the calculated scores was
0.88 after adjusting the weights.

The number of connected components in the specific
fragments.
The number of concepts mentioned by the user in the
posts associated to the user.

Figure 1. Connected components in a fragment

5. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

As shown in Figure 1, there are three types of links connecting
the concepts. Thick black links connect two concepts that are both
mentioned at least once in the posts associated to the user. The
thin grey links connect two concepts, at least one of which is
never mentioned in the posts associated to the user. Dotted links
connect one concept inside the fragment area to an outer concept
which is in the other fragments. Furthermore, the numbers near
each concept represent the number of times a concept is used by
the user. The proposed method will estimate the knowledge of a
user in a specific fragment of the domain knowledge based on
Formula 1:
(
Score(k ) =

l
) ×(
N

n

In this paper we presented a method to determine the level of
expertise of each user participating in a forum. The proposed
method can estimate a user’s knowledge, leveraging the forum
itself. This method could be used in every forum where
introduced mechanisms such as reputation models and social
network analysis cannot distinguish users with specific areas of
expertise. Currently, we are working on a more precise evaluation
of the proposed method by implementing it completely for Java
Forum. Calculating the efficient values for weight variables in the
proposed Formula, as well as defining other parameters to make
the proposed method more effective, is under investigation.

mi

cij )
i =1 j =1

n

6. REFERENCES

(1)

[1] Brusilovsky, P. and Millan, E. 2007. User Models for
Adaptive Hypermedia and Adaptive Educational Systems.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer.

In Formula 1, k is the fragment which is scored, n is the
number of connected components, mi is the number of concepts in
the connected component i, cij is the number of times a specific
concept is repeated in the posts associated to the user, l is the
number of concepts mentioned by the user, N is the total number
of concepts, and , and are weight variables that could be
assigned to each parameter for achieving better results.

[2] Novak, J. D. and Cañas, A. J. 2008. The Theory Underlying
Concept Maps and How to Construct and Use Them,
Technical Report IHMC CmapTools 2006-01 Rev 01-2008.
[3] D. Pérez-Marín , E. Alfonseca , P. Rodríguez , I. PascualNieto. 2007. Automatic Generation of Students' Conceptual
Models from Answers in Plain Text, Proceedings of the 11th
international conference on User Modeling.
[4] Park, U., Calvo, RA. 2008. Automatic Concept Map
Scoring Framework Using the Semantic Web Technologies.
Proceedings of Eighth IEEE International Conference on
Advanced Learning Technologies, Santander, Cantabria.

4. DISCUSSION AND EXPERIMENTS
Firstly, it should be noted that concepts counting for a user
should be performed in all of the posts created by the user and not
just the posts in a specific thread. Secondly, a user knowledge
model should be updated every time he/she posts a message in a
thread. Having the participants of a forum ranked based on their
estimated level of knowledge in the specific fragment, the
discussion could be conducted in a more reasonable manner and
an outer observer can acquire the conclusion more easily.
The granularity level of fragments may affect the result of
Formula 1. Hence, the more domain knowledge is represented in

[5] Schaal, S. 2008. Concept Mapping in Science Education
Assessment: An Approach to Computer-Supported
Achievement Tests in an Interdisciplinary Hypermedia
Learning Environment. Proceeding of the Third Int.
Conference on Concept Mapping, Finland.

718

