Context Aware Query Classification Using
Dynamic Query Window and Relationship Net
Nazli Goharian

Saket S. R. Mengle

Computer Science Department
Georgetown University, Washington, DC
nazli@ir.cs.georgetown.edu

Dataxu Inc.
Boston, Massachusetts
smengle@dataxu.com
to multiple categories such as Computer Security and
Biomedicine); considering the preceding queries of the query
virus that are Flu, Fever and H1N1, there is an indication that the
user is looking for information on biomedical articles, and
subsequently the query is classified as such. In the same query
stream, however, the query H1N1 is unambiguous as it only
points to the category Biomedicine, and hence, does not require
context information for query classification. Preceding queries to
query H1N1 such as query Football, World Cup and Soccer, on
other hand, mislead the classification of the query H1N1. Thus,
our approach utilizes the query stream only for handling the
ambiguous queries.

ABSTRACT
The context of the user queries, preceding a given query, is
utilized to improve the effectiveness of query classification.
Earlier efforts utilize fixed number of preceding queries to derive
such context information. We propose and evaluate an approach
(DQW) that identifies a set of unambiguous preceding queries in a
dynamically determined window to utilize in classifying an
ambiguous query. Furthermore, utilizing a relationship-net (Rnet) that represents relationships among known categories, we
improve the classification effectiveness for those ambiguous
queries whose predicted category in this relationship-net is related
to the category of a query within the window. Our results indicate
that the hybrid approach (DQW+R-net) statistically significantly
improves the Conditional Random Field (CRF) query
classification approach when static query windowing and
hierarchical taxonomy are used (SQW+Tax), in terms of precision
(10.8%), recall (13.2%), and F1 measure (11.9%).

Our second method utilizes the relationships among categories
represented in a relationship-net, R-net, [4] for query
classification. Relationship-net is a network structure where the
categories are represented by nodes and relationships among such
categories are represented using edges. Relationship-net is
automatically generated using text classification [4]. Earlier
efforts utilized hierarchical taxonomies to represent the
relationships among categories. It was shown in [4] that R-net
represents more relationships among categories than a
hierarchical taxonomy, thus, improving the effectiveness of query
classification algorithms. Finally, a hybrid approach that utilizes
the DQW approach and R-net to improve the existing query
classification algorithms is presented and evaluated.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
[Pattern Recognition]: Design Methodology- Classifier design and
evaluation

General Terms
Algorithms, Experimentations

Keywords
Query Classification

Our results indicate that using our approaches, individually or
combined, statistically significantly (95% confidence) improve
the results of CRF approach, which utilizes static query window
and hierarchical taxonomy, in terms of precision, recall and F1
measures.

1. INTRODUCTION
Query classification is the process of assigning predefined
categories to queries. Such category information is useful in
various domains such as vertical search and advertisement search.
The information about the context of the queries is utilized to
improve the effectiveness of query classification. We apply two
methods, each of which individually or combined (hybrid)
increase the effectiveness of existing query classification
approaches. Our first method, Dynamic Query Window (DQW),
calculates the query window size based on the unambiguous
queries in the query stream. An earlier effort, called Conditional
Random Field (CRF) approach [1], uses a static query window
(fixed number of preceding queries) as the context of a given
query. This leads to the loss of information from queries that may
indicate the context of the current query but lay outside of the
fixed window. We propose an approach that expands the query
window dynamically based on the unambiguous preceding
queries. Unambiguous queries point to only one category. For
example, a query that is looking for virus is ambiguous (belongs

2. METHODOLOGY
Our four-step methodology follows.
Step 1: Determining if context information is needed: In this step,
we identify if a query is ambiguous, so that in the next steps based
on the context information of the query, we classify the
ambiguous query. We utilize a feature selection algorithm called
Ambiguity Measure (AM) [3] to assign weight to every query
term. AM(ti) of a term ti, is defined as the maximum AM value
that a term ti has in respect to all categories. AM of a term with
respect to a given category is defined as the ratio of the term
frequency of the term in that category to the term frequency of the
term in the entire collection. Thus, AM assigns higher weight to
terms that appear only in one category. The query weight Wqj

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

723

Figure 1: Evaluation of Precision

Figure 2: Evaluation of Recall

of query qj is calculated as the summation of ambiguity measures
of all terms ti in the query (Formula 1), where T is the number of
terms in query qj.

Figure 3: Evaluation of F1 Measure

T

Wq j = ∑ AM (t i )

.. 1

i =0

We only use the context information for queries, whose query
weight Wqj is below an empirically determined threshold (0.7),
indicating the query is ambiguous.
Step 2: Forming Dynamic Query Window (DQW): To build
context information for an ambiguous query, we need to identify a
dynamic query window. Initially, a small static window (three
preceding queries) is selected to calculate context information. As
unambiguous queries are of our interest in forming context
information, we only utilize the information from those preceding
queries that their weight (Wqj) is above an empirically determined
threshold (0.7). We recursively expand the query window by
including three preceding queries of every unambiguous query in
the query window. We discontinue expanding the query window
when all the three preceding queries of an unambiguous query
have weights lower than an empirically determined threshold.

3. EXPERIMENTAL FRAMEWORK
We utilized 67 categories from KDD Cup 2005 as the set of
predefined categories. To build the classifier, we used 500
documents from ODP dataset. The Excite query log is used to
extract 500 query streams. Each query stream is at least 5-query
long (Query length: avg: 2.7, median: 3). We manually labeled
the queries with the KDD Cup 2005 categories. Standard
evaluation metrics of precision, recall and F1-measure are used.
Statistical significance of our results is measured using paired ttests.

4. Results

Step 3: Identifying category relationships using R-net: In this
step, the weights of the queries in the query window are adjusted.
The premise is that users search on related categories in the same
query stream. Hence, any of the queries in the window whose
category is not related to the ambiguous query in hand are
penalized by reducing the weights of those queries. Unlike earlier
efforts that utilized hierarchical taxonomy (Tax) to detect
category relationships, we utilize R-net, which represents more
relationships, to detect relationships between the category of a
given query and categories of its preceding queries in the query
window. A lower weight (Wqj * 0.5) is assigned to queries in the
query window that are not related to the query to be classified.
The related queries, however, are assigned the original weight
(Wqj).

Figures 1, 2 and 3 indicate that our hybrid approach
(CRF+DQW+R-net) statistically significantly (95% confidence)
outperforms the existing state of the art (CRF+SQW+Tax)
approach with respect to precision (10.8%), recall (13.2%) and
F1-measure (11.9%). CRF+DQW approach, even without using
R-net, still improves over CRF+SQW by 3.5%. Moreover, as
CRF+DQW expands the window size to allow more unambiguous
queries to provide context information, the improvements over
CRF+SQW in recall (3%) and F1-measure (3.2%) of query
classification are also statistically significant. Using R-net along
with CRF approach (CRF+R-net) also statistically significantly
improves the precision (6.7%), recall (7.1%) and F1 measure
(6.9%) over CRF+Tax approach.

Step 4: Classifying ambiguous queries: CRF is a discriminative
probabilistic model used in the classification of sequential data.
CRF is represented using undirected graph where the vertex
represents a random category and edge represents the dependency
between two random categories [2]. We utilize CRF to classify an
ambiguous query into a category based on the categories of the
preceding unambiguous queries in a window, based on weights
calculated in step 3. We implement the CRF approach using an
open source utility called CRF++. As the earlier effort [1], using
CRF, utilizes static query window (SQW) and hierarchical
taxonomy (Tax), we refer to CRF approach as CRF+SQW+Tax.

5. REFERENCES
[1] Cao, H., Hu, D. H., Shen, D., Jiang, D., Sun, J., Chen, E.,
and Yang, Q., Context-aware query classification. SIGIR,
2009
[2] Lafferty, J. D., McCallum, A., and Pereira, F. C.,
Conditional Random Fields: Probabilistic Models for
Segmenting and Labeling Sequence Data. ICML, 2001
[3] Mengle, S., Goharian, N., Ambiguity measure featureselection algorithm. JASIST, 60(5), 2009
[4] Mengle, S., Goharian, N., Detecting relationships among
categories using text classification. JASIST, 61(5), 2010

724

