A Picture is Worth a Thousand Search Results: Finding
Child-Oriented Multimedia Results with collAge
Karl Gyllstrom
karl.gyllstrom@cs.kuleuven.be

Marie-Francine Moens
sien.moens@cs.kuleuven.be

Department of Computer Science
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven
Leuven, Belgium

ABSTRACT

One challenge in integrating TotBytes into collAge is in
determining appropriate types of media results to return for
a particular query. For example, while a music sheet image
would be an appropriate TotByte for a query about piano
music, it would probably not be appropriate for a query
about biology. To address this problem, our work leverages a “crowd-sourcing” approach in which frequently issued
queries are used to determine whether or not a query and
media type are coherent. For example, the query “dinosaur
coloring pages” is issued quite frequently (e.g., 577,000 times
in Google’s Suggestion database [3]), while, presumably, the
nonsensical query “calculus coloring pages” is not (at least,
it does not appear in Google’s database).

We present a simple and effective approach to complement
search results for children’s web queries with child-oriented
multimedia results, such as coloring pages and music sheets.
Our approach determines appropriate media types for a query
by searching Google’s database of frequent queries for cooccurrences of a query’s terms (e.g., “dinosaurs”) with preselected multimedia terms (e.g., “coloring pages”). We show
the effectiveness of this approach through an online user
evaluation.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.5.0 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: General

http://co.lla.ge/search?q=dinosaurs

General Terms

collAGE
dinosaurs

Experimentation, Human Factors

dinosaurs

dinosaurs

Search

Search

Results for "dinosaurs"
Dinosaurs (Greek: δεινόσαυρος,
deinosauros) were the dominant
terrestrial vertebrate animals for over
160 million years, from the late Triassic
period (about 230 million years ago)
until the end of the Cretaceous period
(about 65 million years ago), [...]

Keywords
children, Google, query suggestion, Mechanical Turk

summary

1.

mazes

INTRODUCTION

Web search engines are not highly usable by children and
young audiences [4], in part because results are presented to
users in the form of a list of web page summaries, with a
limited integration of mixed media (e.g., images). We believe that children’s experiences with search engines would
benefit from a greater emphasis on multimedia results, particularly of media that are not typically presented as firstclass entities. For example, while Google search results commonly present images, there is no specialized presentation
of interactive and learning media such as mazes, puzzles,
tracing/coloring pages, music sheets, and games. We refer to these specialized media results as TotBytes, and we
are building a search interface called collAge in which they
can play a strong role in children’s search experiences. Our
search engine web page currently acts as a thin wrapper
between the user and Google search, where, for the user’s
query, TotBytes are presented alongside fewer traditional
web page search results. Figure 1 depicts a mockup of our
system, showing a potential interface displaying TotBytes in
response to a user’s query about dinosaurs.

anatomy

dinosaurs

diagram

music

connect
the dots

Figure 1: collAge mockup (can be zoomed).

2.

APPROACH

Initially, we preselected a set of media types which we felt
would be fun and useful for information-seeking children (see
the left column of Table 1), although our approach can easily be expanded to new types. For a given user’s query q, we
generate a set of TotBytes TB q as follows. First, for each
media type, we create a media query mi ∈ Mq by appending
to q the media type’s terms (e.g., “crossword puzzles”). To
filter out media types which are not meaningful complements
to q, we dispatch each media query mi ∈ Mq – without its

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

731

last letter1 – to Google Suggest [3], which generates a set of
suggested queries G(mi ). If mi ∈ G(mi ), it is considered to
be a valid query (as mi is frequently issued by Google users),
and it is dispatched to Google’s image search2 , from which
the URL of the first result is added to the set of TotBytes
for the user’s query. The TotBytes can then be presented –
with image links to the containing pages – to the user alongside traditional search results, as in Figure 1, although we
leave the problems of presentation and ranking for future
work. The combined processes of query suggestion lookup
and image search take between 100-200 milliseconds on average, and the process for each media type can be executed
in parallel.

3.

This is due to the wide topical range of Qeval ; we felt users
would often not recognize the query topic and use Google to
learn about the topic, at which point they would be using
the source of information (valid or not) to verify itself.
The results are depicted in Table 1. Our results included
assessments by 156 unique Mechanical Turk worker IDs.
Due to the anonymity policy, we could not collect demographic data on the users, but we assume from the site’s
policy that they are all at least 18 years of age. We filtered eligible candidates to those who have received favorable scores for at least 95% of their completed tasks.
Media type
music sheet
connect-the-dots
painting
coloring page
map
flag
anatomy
interactive game
maze
tracing page
word puzzle
crossword puzzle
Total

EVALUATION AND RESULTS

We conducted an online evaluation with adults to determine if the TotBytes produced by collAge reflected the media type for which they were constructed; for example, that
the TotBytes for the “music sheet” media type actually portrayed music sheets. Our hypothesis was that collAge would
produce more accurate results than an approach that simply appended media terms without checking them against
the database of popular queries. We first generated a set of
queries Qeval with which to evaluate our approach, as, to
our knowledge, there is no existing corpus of children’s web
search queries. We constructed this set by collecting the
titles of leaf subdirectories under the top-level topic “Kids
and Teens” from the Open Directory Project [2], which included titles such as “dinosaurs” and “Egypt”. Though not
necessarily reflective of queries that children would naturally
generate, these queries suffice in this stage of evaluation as
we are merely determining the extent to which collAge can
determine coherent TotBytes for arbitrary queries.
Next, we generated a set of TotBytes TB for a random
sample of queries from Qeval . For comparison, we also generated a set of baseline TotBytes, where the query database
did not include their corresponding media queries, and added
this set to TB . For each bi ∈ TB , we constructed an HTML
page displaying the media term(s) (e.g., “maps”) and image
result from bi , a question asking if the image depicted an instance of the term (e.g., a map), and a “Yes/No” input form
for users to record answers. These pages were uploaded to
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk [1] service, which presented the
pages to human users, who answered their questions for a
small payment. This produced a binary validity assessment
for each bi . We then compared the number of valid assessments between the collAge and baseline TotBytes across
each media type, and measured the significance of their differences using the two-tailed Fisher’s exact test.
Note that we assumed that a valid depiction of the media
type partially validated that the media type was appropriate
for the query. The theory was that less coherent combinations of queries and media terms are less likely to produce a
result that depicts either query or media type. A limitation
in this evaluation is that we do not ask for assessments for
whether the TotBytes reflect the topic of the original query.

V
21
13
103
146
139
82
43
16
8
2
9
7
589

collAge
T
V /T
21
1.00
13
1.00
112 0.92
162 0.90
159 0.87
98
0.84
54
0.80
21
0.76
12
0.67
3
0.67
15
0.60
23
0.30
693 0.85

V
26
20
25
32
22
16
25
26
21
29
15
14
271

baseline
T
V /T
42
0.62
40
0.50
41
0.61
41
0.78
41
0.54
41
0.39
52
0.48
46
0.57
37
0.57
51
0.57
36
0.42
49
0.29
517 0.52

P
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.06
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.17
0.74
1.00
0.36
1.00
x

Table 1: Results. V indicates number of positive
assessments, T indicates total assessments, and V /T
indicates the ratio of valid to invalid assessments. P
indicates P-value from the significance test between
collAge and baseline.

4.

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

collAge showed a consistent improvement over the baseline that was significant in cases where collAge was performing the strongest. The media types we chose had a range
of effectiveness when used to generate TotBytes, with many
performing quite well, and an overall strong performance.
Even types at the low ranges could be useful (e.g., for a
media type with 50% accuracy, simply displaying two TotBytes for the media type will create a 75% chance that at
least one is meaningful.) Further, the collAge approach and
evaluation can be easily repeated for new potential media
types, making it generalizable to domains beyond children’s
interests. We plan to continue this research by implementing a usable prototype and evaluating it with children in a
natural scenario, as well as determining further methods to
find and rank media results.
Acknowledgements The research leading to these results has
received funding from the European Community’s Seventh Framework Programme FP7/2007-2013 under grant agreement No. 231507.

References
[1] Amazon Mechanical Turk. http://www.mturk.com/.

1

[2] ODP – Open Directory Project. http://www.dmoz.org/.

The last letter is removed from the query because Google
Suggest will not offer a suggestion that is an exact match to
the query provided.
2
The results may be filtered for certain media types; for
example, given a media query for the maze media type, we
filter the result list to include only images that are grayscale
and feature line art.

[3] Query Suggest FAQ.
suggestfaq.html.

http://labs.google.com/intl/en/

[4] D. Bilal and J. Kirby. Differences and similarities in information seeking: children and adults as web users. Information
Processing & Management, 38(5):649 – 670, 2002.

732

