Flickr Group Recommendation based on Tensor
Decomposition
Nan Zheng1, Qiudan Li1, Shengcai Liao2, Leiming Zhang1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China

1,2

{nan.zheng, qiudan.li, leiming.zhang}@ia.ac.cn1, scliao@nlpr.ia.ac.cn2
integrating all these information together. As tensor model offers a
natural representation for multiple facets, we propose a tensor
decomposition-based group recommendation model in this paper to
combine semantic tags with social relations. In the following of this
article, we will illustrate the details of this model, along with the
experimental results.

ABSTRACT
Over the last few years, Flickr has gained massive popularity and
groups in Flickr are one of the main ways for photo diffusion.
However, the huge volume of groups brings troubles for users to
decide which group to choose. In this paper, we propose a tensor
decomposition-based group recommendation model to suggest
groups to users which can help tackle this problem. The proposed
model measures the latent associations between users and groups by
considering both semantic tags and social relations. Experimental
results show the usefulness of the proposed model.

2. METHOD
2.1 Data Representation
The idea of group recommendation is to suggest groups which may
have latent associations with the active user. We provide a small
example shown in Figure 1 to illustrate the benefits of three modes
compared with two modes. In the two-mode relations (on the left),
we cannot find any associations between user U1 and group G3,
while in the three-mode relations (on the right), tags perform as a
bridge between users and groups. We can see that U1 has latent
association with G3 through tag T1.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.2.8 [Database Management]: Database Applications – Data
mining, H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information
Search and Retrieval – Information filtering

General Terms: Algorithms, Experimentation.
Keywords

User s

Flickr Group, Tensor Decomposition, Group Recommendation.

1. INTRODUCTION
Flickr offers a number of ways for users to browse and find photos,
such as exploring or searching through members, tags, groups or
interesting photos. Groups in Flickr are self-organized communities
to share photos and conversations with common interests. As groups
are self-organized, plenty of groups fall into a similar topic, i.e.
22,183 groups are returned by searching with the keyword cat.
Indeed, people need an easy-to-use tool to guide their selection. In
this paper, we provide a group recommendation model to help
people more easily engage in group activities.

Gr oups

U1

1

U2

3

U3

2

4

User s

G1

U1

G2

U2

T1

2
4

G3

Tags
1

U3

T2
3

Gr oups
1
4
2

G1
G2

3
T3

G3

Figure 1. Usage data of an example.
From Figure 1, a three-mode tensor Z ∈ R I × J × N can be constructed
from the usage data, where I, J, N are the numbers of users, tags and
groups respectively. Each element zijn in the tensor denotes user i’s
corresponding photo count with tag j in group n. The advantage of a
three-way tensor is that we can explicitly model the relations among
users, tags and groups in a unified way.

Typically, only group members can contribute to a group pool. A
user attaches tags to a photo and shares it with one or several
suitable groups. Semantic relations among tags could be detected by
their overlaps in groups or users. The joint patterns of two users can
be denoted by their semantic tag usage and similar groups involved.
Similarly, the joint patterns of two groups can be expressed by
semantic tags co-occurrence and the number of users who
participated in both groups. However, the multiple facets introduce
challenges of modeling, as a result, most prior work has focused on
specific points, such as applying two-mode relations: group-tag,
user-tag or group-user [1,2] or incorporating data into two
dimensions [3] to construct topic models. Although these models are
effective by considering semantic data like tags or social data like
group membership respectively, it may bring better performance if

2.2 Tensor Decomposition-based Group
Recommendation Model
We employ CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP) tensor decomposition
[4] to capture the underlying patterns in the user-tag-group tensor.
The basic idea of the CP decomposition is to fit Z with a sum of
component rank-one tensors, such that
R

Z ≈ ∑ λr a r o b r o c r

(1)

r =1

where the symbol o denotes the outer product, R is the decomposed
rank of the tensor, λr is a weight that indicates how important the
r-th component is, and vectors a r ∈ R I , b r ∈ R J and cr ∈ R N .
Combining the vectors from the rank-one components, we get three
factor matrices: user matrix A, tag matrix B and group matrix C of

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR '10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

737

recommendation results. That is, we suggest the top k groups for
each user. We randomly select one joined group and k-1 unjoined
groups for each user to form the test set and the remaining joined
groups form the training set. We repeat this procedure 50 times for
different random samplings. The objective is to find the place of the
joined group in the recommendation list. There are k possible ranks
for the joined group and the best result is that no unjoined groups
appear before it. Figure 2 shows the cumulative distributions of
ranks for the joined groups in the test set (k=201). 0% means that
the joined group is at the first place in the ordered list, while 100%
means that it turns up in the last position. To demonstrate the
usefulness and effectiveness of our model, we offer comparison
tests on user-based model [7] and NMF-based model [8] on usergroup matrix.

size I × R, J × R, N × R respectively. The advantages of the CP
model lie in: (i) the model transforms rich relations among users,
tags and groups into R components, which present the principal axes
of entities across the three modes and (ii) the results project users,
tags and groups to the same R components, which reduces
dimensions and brings conveniences for further applications based
on such a model. Specially, we compute the non-negative CP
decomposition by multiplicative updates like non-negative matrix
factorization (NMF) adopted [5] by using the Tensor Toolbox. Such
an approach could retain the non-negative characteristics of the
original data which facilitates easier interpretation.
Three factor matrices discover the latent topics that govern the
associations among users, tags and groups. The i-th row of user
matrix A provides an additive linear combination of components
which indicate the topics of user i. The higher weight user i is
assigned to a component, the more interested user i is in the relevant
topic. The n-th row of group matrix C provides an additive linear
combination of components that indicate the topics of group n. The
higher weight a group is assigned to a component, the more related
the group is with the relevant topic. Thus, groups can be
recommended according to the captured associations. We define a
score matrix S of size I×N as follows:

Cumulative Distribution

1

R

S = ∑ λr a r cTr .

0.8
0.6
0.4

our model
NMF-based model
user−based model

0.2
0

0%

10%

20%

30% 40% 50% 60%
Recommendation Rank

70%

80%

90%

100%

Figure 2. Top-201 recommendation performances.

(2)

Comparing the results, our model provides better group
recommendations than user-based model and NMF-based model on
our dataset. All these differences are statistically significant
(p<0.01). It may be because the proposed model could capture
more latent and complex associations among user-tag-group than
two-mode relations and provide more reasonable results.

r =1

S measures the latent associations between users and groups in
which Sin represents the likeliness user i will participate in group n.

3. EXPERIMENTS
3.1 Dataset and Parameter Settings
We use Flickr API to gather data about users, tags and groups. After
stop-word removal and stemming, we end up with a size of
197×5328×4064 tensor and over 0.9 million nonzero entries. The
ideal value of R should be large enough to capture all the important
characterizations yet small enough to gain time efficiency. We
range R from 10 to 100 by an interval of 10 and find that 50 is a
suitable tradeoff. Thus, R is empirically set to be 50 in our
experiments.

4. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

3.2 Results and Discussions

5. REFERENCES

In this paper, we provide a tensor decomposition-based Flickr group
recommendation model by combining semantic data with social
data. Preliminary experiments support the validity and effectiveness
of the approach. We plan to offer a deep analysis on the latent
associations mined by such a model. This research is supported by
projects 863 (No.2006AA010106), 973 (No.2007CB311007) and
NSFC (No.60703085).

[1] Negoescu, R. and Gatica-Perez, D. Analyzing flickr groups.

Before performing group recommendation, we first discuss if the
proposed model could reasonably identify the latent associations
among users, tags and groups. We examine the decomposition
results to present the leading entities in the 5th component on each
mode shown in Table 1. As shown, all the tags and groups express
the topic of component 5 to be self portrait, and the first column of
Table 1 lists 5 users who are most relevant to self portrait. In this
way, our model can successfully discover the latent associations
among users, tags and groups.

CIVR’08 pp. 417-426.

[2] Negoescu, R., Adams, B., Phung, D., Venkatesh, S. and
Gatica-Perez, D. Flickr hypergroups. MM’09 pp. 813-816.

[3] Negoescu, R. and Gatica-Perez, D. Topickr: flickr groups and
users reloaded. MM’08 pp. 857-860.

[4] Carroll, J. and Chang, J. (1970) Analysis of individual

Table 1. Top 5 entities in the fifth component on each mode.
Users
Nic Temby
Lee Bader
antonkawasaki
Steven Dempsey
Nikki P.

Tags
portrait
self
woman
girl
selfportrait

[5]

Groups
Self-Portraits!!!
Artistic Self-Portraits
365 Days
Self Portraits
Autoportrait

[6]
[7]
[8]

We use the top-k recommendations metric [6] to evaluate group

738

differences in multidimensional scaling via an N-way
generalization of “Eckart-Young” decomposition.
Psychometrika. 35(3) 283-319.
Lee, D. and Seung, H. Learning the parts of objects by nonnegative matrix factorization. Nature’99. 401(6755) 788-791.
Koren, Y. Factorization meets the neighborhood: a multifaceted collaborative filtering model. KDD’08 pp. 426-434.
Sarwar, B., Karypis, G., Konstan, J. and Riedl, J. Analysis of
recommendation algorithms for e-commerce. EC’00.
Zhang, S., Wang, W., Ford, J. and Makedon, F. Learning from
incomplete ratings using non-negative matrix factorization.
SDM’06 pp. 548–552.

