Entropy Descriptor for Image Classification
Hongyu Li, Junyu Niu, and Jiachen Chen

Huibo Liu

School of Computer Science
Fudan University
Shanghai,China

School of Software Engineering
Tongji University
Shanghai,China

{hongyuli,jyniu,0361040}@fudan.edu.cn

7huiboliu@tongji.edu.cn

ABSTRACT

model of training images, which could be used to determine the
class label of test images. The classification strategy here is to find
the best position of a test image in all cycles. The test image is
grouped into the class providing the best position, i.e., the class
with the least entropy increase resulting from inserting the image
to this position. In this study, the optimization problem is solved
using tabu search. To expediate the procedure of finding the optimal cycle, parallel computing on GPU is adopted to simultaneously
calculate the entropy of each element.

This paper presents a novel entropy descriptor in the sense of geometric manifolds. With this descriptor, entropy cycles can be easily
designed for image classification. Minimizing this entropy leads to
an optimal entropy cycle where images are connected in the semantic order. During classification, the training step is to find an
optimal entropy cycle in each class. In the test step, an unknown
image is grouped into a class if the entropy increase as the result
of inserting the image into the cycle of this class is relatively least.
The proposed approach can generalize well on difficult image classification problems where images with same objects are taken in
multiple views. Experimental results show that this entropy descriptor performs well in image classification and has potential in
the image-based modeling retrieval.

2.

ENTROPY DESCRIPTOR

The semantic representation of images is the key to the success
of image classification. In this study, we propose GEOmetric Manifold ENtropy (GEOMEN) to describe the semantic similarity of
images in the feature space.
Specifically, given a set of image feature vectors X = {xi |xi ∈
Rm , i = 1, 2, ..., n}. We first define an entropy cycle of length n
as a closed path without self-intersections. Each vector in this cycle
is connected with two neighbors and the corresponding connection
order O is symbolized as {o1 , o2 , . . . , on , o1 }, where the entry corresponds to the index of vectors. Then, the GEOMEN of the set X
with the order O is represented as the average of the entropy on
every point in the cycle as,

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: H.3.1 Content Analysis and Indexing; H.3.3 Information Search and Retrieval; I.4.8
[Image Processing and Computer Vision]: Scene-Analysis—Object recognition

General Terms
Algorithms, Performance, Experimentation

S(X, O) =

Keywords
image classification, entropy minimization, cycle

n
1∑
s(X, O, i).
n i=1

(1)

and each s(X, O, i) is the sum of two components: the spatial position p(X, O, i) and geometric g(X, O, i) as,

1. INTRODUCTION

s(X, O, i) = αp(X, O, i) + g(X, O, i).

Image classification is the task of classifying images according
to their object category, which is significant for both effective image organization and retrieval. This problem has been the subject
of many recent papers [2, 3] using classifiers based on support vector machine (SVM). Achieving high image classification accuracy,
however, is quite challenging. This is partly because semantically
related images may reside in an embedded manifold and not a linear
hyperplane in the feature space. In this paper, we focus our attention on solving this problem and propose a novel entropy descriptor
for image classification.
The proposed entropy is used to describe an embedded manifold
with its geometrical features. Image classification is implemented
through organizing images as a semantically continuous cycle with
entropy minimization. The optimal cycles are actually the extracted

(2)

Here, α is used to adjust the contribution of p to GEOMEN. GEOMEN essentially represents the smoothness and sharpness of the
cycle with the connection order O. In addition, it is also a metric
of disorder and similarity of the data in the embedded manifolds.
Since image ranking can be thought as the problem of extracting
a 1-dimensional manifold, actually a curve, we only consider the
representation of GEOMEN on 1-dimensional curves.
The spatial component of GEOMEN is measured by the Euclidean distance, p(X, O, i) = ∥xoi − xo(i+1) ∥2 , where xoi and
xo(i+1) are continuously connected in the cycle order O. The geometric component of GEMOEN is composed of two terms: the
curvature κ of curves and a regularization term ρ. That is,
g(X, O, i) = κ2 (xo(i−1) , xoi , xo(i+1) )
+ ρ2 (xo(i−1) , xoi , xo(i+1) , xo(i+2) ).

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

(3)

The reason of introducing the regularization term is that the dis-

753

datasets are tested: UMIST face1 , car, gesture, and aircraft. For
the convenience of 10-fold cross-validation, we discarded those
classes with the sample number less than 20 in the UMIST face
database. The car images were taken with natural background clutters. Each gesture class includes 20 images taken from multiple
views. The aircraft images were produced through projecting threedimensional aircraft models into different planes, which is like changing the viewpoint by rotating the models in some sense.
To compare with state-of-the-art methods, the classifier based
on SVM was also tested on the datasets stated above. All test results are presented in Table 1, where the second and third columns
respectively represents the number of classes and images in each
dataset. The last two columns are the average classification accuracy respectively obtained using our approach and SVM. The
value in parentheses denotes the confidence interval. Although it
is well known that SVM has the strong ability of generalization
in image classification, the proposed framework obviously has the
better performance than SVM, higher accuracy and smaller confidence interval. In addition, we employed the NVIDIA GTX 260
GPU to speed up computation. There is distinct improvement of
almost 100 times in the computation speed when the size of a class
in the aircraft dataset is only 100. Moreover, the speedup ability is
proportional to the size of a dataset, which means that our approach
has advantages in handling large-scale datasets.

Table 1: Image classification on different datasets.
datasets class image
ours(%)
SVM(%)
UMIST
13
360
97.52(1.93) 85.84(3.59)
car
15
450
93.54(1.64) 71.04(5.33)
gesture
11
220
91.36(4.19) 78.64(7.20)
aircraft
20
2000 81.33(2.21) 65.34(3.22)

crete curvature is sensitive to noise. The regularization term can
significantly improve the robustness of our algorithm.

3. IMAGE CLASSIFICATION
Since there is a clear distinction between two classes, the entropy will greatly increase at boundary points. This enlightens us
that misclassifying a point into a class must lead the sharp increase
of the entropy of this class with an optimal cycle. In reverse, if a
point is correctly grouped into a class, the entropy of this class with
an optimal cycle will only change a little, where the principal idea
of the proposed classification framework comes from. In our image
classification framework, each class is first respectively trained to
obtain an optimal cycle (model). Then an unknown image is assigned a class label through comparing the entropy increase after
inserting this image into each optimal cycle.
In order to find the optimal cycle, we need to minimize the GEOMEN, O∗ = arg min S(X, O). In this study, we approximate
the global minimum of the entropy through a simplified tabu search
method. The details about the tabu search method can be found in
reference [4]. Since the calculation of entropy of each element is
independent, parallel computing is a good way to speed up such
an optimization problem. This study makes full use of the ability
of graphic processing unit (GPU) in parallel computing and implements the tabu search procedure with the CUDA programming
technology.
The optimal cycle of each class is actually the extracted model of
training images, which could be used to determine the class label
of unknown (test) images. The strategy of classification here is to
find the best position of a test image Q in all cycles. We means by
"best" that the increase of entropy ∆S due to adding this test image
to the current position is the least among all positions. The test
image is grouped into the class providing the best position. In this
case, however, the decision strategy appears too simple to provide
correct class information due to the disturbance of acquisition noise
and computation error. Therefore, we bring in the idea of k-NN and
make it suitable for our framework. Specifically, we pick first k best
positions as possible candidates, and then rank all classes according
to the following criterion, r(Ci , Q) = (count(Ci ) − β)/avg(Ci ),
where parameter β is introduced to prevent over-fitting. count(Ci )
denotes the number of candidates belonging to class Ci . avg(Ci )
is the average entropy increase that candidates
∑ in class Ci result
in and can be formulated as, avg(Ci ) = ( Ci ∆S)/count(Ci ),
where ∆S represents the entropy increase if image Q is added.
The rank r(Ci , Q) implies the confidence of image Q belonging
to class Ci . Obviously, high confidence requires more count and
less avg when β is fixed. Therefore, image Q is considered as a
member of the class with highest rank.

5.

CONCLUSIONS

The good classification performance on the UMIST face and gesture datasets demonstrates that the proposed framework is quite
promising in the application of face and gesture analysis. In spite of
the existence of background clutter in the car images, our method
can still work well with the average accuracy 93.54% and confidence interval 1.64, much better than SVM with the average accuracy 71.04% and confidence interval 5.33. The success in classifying the projection images of aircraft models makes possible the
future image-based model retrieval. Anyway, no matter how different the viewpoint of images is or how disordered the image background is, the proposed classification method can always perform
well, which demonstrates its feasibility and robustness.

6.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research was partially supported by National High Technology Research and Development Program 2009AA01Z429, Shanghai Leading Academic Discipline Project B114, and Natural Science Foundation of China Grant 60903120.

7.

REFERENCES

[1] A. Bosch, A. Zisserman, and X. Munoz. Representing shape
with a spatial pyramid kernel. In CIVR ’07, pages 401–408.
[2] K.-S. Goh, E. Chang, and K.-T. Cheng. SVM binary classifier
ensembles for image classification. In CIKM ’01, pages
395–402, 2001.
[3] C. Wang, D. M. Blei, and F.-F. Li. Simultaneous image
classification and annotation. In CVPR 2009, pages
1903–1910.
[4] C. Zhang, H. Li, Q. Guo, J. Jia, and I.-F. Shen. Fast active tabu
search and its application to image retrieval. In IJCAI’09,
pages 1333–1338, 2009.

4. EXPERIMENTS
The image feature adopted in the following experiments is the
Pyramid of Histograms Orientation Gradients (PHOG) [1]. Four

1

754

http://images.ee.umist.ac.uk/danny/database.html

