Has Portfolio Theory Got Any Principles?
Guido Zuccon, Leif Azzopardi, and C. J. “Keith” van Rijsbergen
Dept. of Computing Science, University of Glasgow
Glasgow, Scotland (UK)

{guido, leif, keith}@dcs.gla.ac.uk

ABSTRACT

relevance with: (i) an additive term which synthesises the
risk inclination of the user, (ii) the uncertainty (variance) associated with the probability estimation, and (iii) the sum
of correlations between the candidate document and documents ranked in previous positions. In PT, for each rank
position i, documents are selected according to:

Recently, Portfolio Theory (PT) has been proposed for Information Retrieval. However, under non-trivial conditions PT
violates the original Probability Ranking Principle (PRP).
In this poster, we shall explore whether PT upholds a different ranking principle based on Quantum Theory, i.e. the
Quantum Probability Ranking Principle (QPRP), and examine the relationship between this new model and the new
ranking principle. We make a significant contribution to the
theoretical development of PT and show that under certain
circumstances PT upholds the QPRP, and thus guarantees
an optimal ranking according to the QPRP. A practical implication of this finding is that the parameters of PT can be
automatically estimated via the QPRP, instead of resorting
to extensive parameter tuning.

1
additive term
}|
{
z
X
C
B
2
wd0 σd σd0 ρd,d0 )C
di = arg max B
A
@P (d) − b(wd σd − 2
0

d0 ∈RA

(1)
where P (d) is the estimated probability of relevance of document d, parameter b encodes the risk propensity of the user,
σd2 is the variance associated to the probability estimation
of document d, wd is a weight inversely proportional to the
rank position, which expresses the importance of the rank
position itself, ρd,d0 is the correlation between document d
and document d0 , and RA is the list of documents already
ranked. Given this model we now compare it analytically to
the two ranking principles.

Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.3.3 Information
Storage and Retrieval - Retrieval Models
General Terms: Theory, Experimentation
Keywords: Portfolio Theory for IR, Quantum Probability
Ranking Principle, interdependent document relevance

1.

Probability Ranking Principle: Under the PRP, the
optimal ranking would be obtained by taking, at each rank
position i, the document d that maximises P (d). In relation
to PT then, when the user parameter b is zero, or documents’ variance is null, the additive component of Eq. 1 is
zero. In this case, PT upholds the PRP. This guarantees the
optimality of the ranking in tasks such as ad-hoc retrieval.
But this is a trivial case. As soon as |b| increases, the influence of the additive term will perturb the ranking, and PT
will begin to violate the PRP (the greater the |b| the further
PT departs from the PRP)1 . This is because documents will
not be strictly ordered according to their decreasing probability of (independent) relevance as prescribed by the PRP.

INTRODUCTION

Inspired by financial models used in economics, a new
model for retrieval has been developed: Portfolio Theory [2,
3]. The intuition behind the model is as follows: estimates of
the document’s relevance can be improved by accounting for
the variance and risk of the estimate in relation to the other
documents. Key to the approach is the assumption that
document relevance is dependent upon other documents and
this must be taken into consideration; violating the PRP.
Thus, PT deviates from traditional retrieval models which
assume independence between documents. In this poster,
we analytically examine PT in the context of the PRP and
its Quantum counterpart, explaining the relationships that
exist between the different principles and PT.

2.

Quantum Probability Ranking Principle: While, we
have shown that PT does not uphold the PRP in non-trivial
cases, here we explore whether PT upholds a different ranking principle: the QPRP [6]. This ranking principle stems
from the use of quantum probability theory [1] within IR
through an analogy between the ranking scenario and the
double slit experiment. In [6], the idea is that the interference between particles is analogous to the interference between document relevance. Essentially, the interference can
be thought to represent interdependent document relevance

RANKING WITH PORTFOLIO THEORY

Portfolio Theory ranks documents by balancing the probability estimates returned by a retrieval model with the variance of their estimates. This accounts for the risk associated
with ranking documents under uncertainty. Specifically, the
resulting ranking criteria combines the estimated document
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

1

755

Assuming that the other PT parameters are non zero.

and it is estimated from documents features and relationships. The resultant ranking principle, the QPRP, retrieves
at rank i a document such that:
!
X
di = arg max P (d) +
Id,d0
(2)

or when the two quantities are proportional (this is justified
by rank equivalences). This relation can be exploited to
estimate PT’s parameters and thus guaranteeing optimality
under the QPRP. In fact, from Eq. 5 and focusing on a
particular d0 , these will be characterised by the pairs (b, σd2 )
and the function wd0 such that:
p
p
P (d) P (d0 )
(6)
bσd2 =
2wd0

d0 ∈RA

!
=

X p

arg max P (d) +

P (d)

p
P (d0 ) cos θd,d0

d0 ∈RA

While the parameterization of Portfolio Theory means
that the ranking strategy is more general and configurable
than the QPRP, this introduces the complexity and burden
of having to estimate these parameters. By using this relationship with the QPRP it is possible to directly estimate
the parameters of PT without requiring training data and
parameter estimation problems.

0
where Id,d0 is the interference
pbetween documents d and d
p
0
and is equivalent to P (d) P (d ) cos θd,d0 . The interference arises because in quantum probability theory, the total probability obtained from the composition of the probabilities associated to two events is the sum of the probabilities of the events and their “interference” (i.e. pAB =
pA + pB + IAB )2 [1]. The angle θd,d0 is the phase difference
between the probability amplitudes associated to documents
d and d0 (see [6] for further details and [5] for way to estimate
this component).
Like PT, the QPRP reduces to the PRP when the interference between documents is null, i.e. documents are not
interdependently related. And also like PT, the QPRP is
characterised by an additive ranking formula, which interpolates relevancy and document dependencies. Previously,
we have shown that PT violates the PRP in non trivial circumstances. This is actually desirable, since PT aims to
overcome PRP’s assumption of independent document relevance.
But, does PT uphold the QPRP? To answer this,
we consider a particular situation. We instantiate QPRP
approximating the interference term with a function of the
Pearson’s correlation ρ between documents term vectors, i.e.
cos θd,d0 = −ρd,d0 , as suggested in [4]. The QPRP’s ranking
formula can be written as:
!
X p
p
0
(3)
P (d) P (d )ρd,d0
di = arg max P (d) −

3.

In this poster, we have shown that Portfolio Theory for
IR upholds the different ranking principles under particular
conditions. While the fact that PT upholds the PRP in only
a trivial case is not very useful, the fact that PT can uphold
the QPRP in certain non-trivial settings is potentially very
useful. This is an important contribution because it shows
that PT, under particular circumstances, upholds the Quantum Probability Ranking Principle. This implies that the
parameters of PT can be automatically estimated via the
relationship with the QPRP and, by doing so, guarantees
theoretically optimal performance under the QPRP. This
has the added benefit that no expensive parameter tuning is
required. It may also be the case that developments within
the QPRP, specifically how the angle between documents
is approximated, could also be transferred to PT, further
improving the method.
Future work will be directed towards empirically investigating whether estimating the parameters of PT given this
relationship with the QPRP lead to effective approximations
that validate these findings.

d0 ∈RA

Similarly, the Pearson’s correlation ρ can be employed to
measure the correlation in Eq. 1, as proposed in [3]. Moreover, since σd is assumed to be a constant for each document
in the collection3 , Eq. 1 can be re-stated as
!
X
2
di = arg max P (d) − bσd (wd + 2
wd0 ρd,d0 )

Acknowledgments. The authors would like to thank
Alvaro Huertas-Rosero. This work is partially funded by
EPSRC EP/F014384/.

4.

d0 ∈RA

arg max P (d) −

X

2bσd2 wd0 ρd,d0

(4)

d0 ∈RA

where wd is dropped for rank equivalence reasons, i.e. whatever the d under consideration, wd is constant and so is
bσd2 wd . When instantiating PT in these particular circumstances, b and σd2 can be treated as parameters to be tuned.
In particular, PT delivers the same ranking of QPRP, i.e.
theoretical optimal performances under QPRP’s assumptions, when:
X
X p
p
P (d) P (d0 )ρd,d0 =
2bσd2 wd0 ρd,d0
(5)
d0 ∈RA

REFERENCES

[1] R. P. Feynman. The Concept of Probability in
Quantum Mechanics. In Proc. 2nd Berk. Symp. on
Math. Stat. and Prob., pages 533–541, 1951.
[2] J. Wang. Mean-variance analysis: A new document
ranking theory in information retrieval. In ECIR ’09,
pages 4–16, 2009.
[3] J. Wang and J. Zhu. Portfolio theory of information
retrieval. In SIGIR ’09, pages 115–122, 2009.
[4] G. Zuccon and L. Azzopardi. Using the Quantum
Probability Ranking Principle to Rank Interdependent
Documents. In ECIR ’10, pages 357–369, 2010.
[5] G. Zuccon, L. Azzopardi, C. Hauff, and C. J. van
Rijsbergen. Estimating interference in the QPRP for
subtopic retrieval. In SIGIR ’10, 2010. to appear.
[6] G. Zuccon, L. Azzopardi, and C. J. van Rijsbergen. The
quantum probability ranking principle for information
retrieval. In ICTIR ’09, pages 232–240, 2009.

!
=

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

d0 ∈RA

2

As opposed to what happens in Kolmogorovian probability theory,
i.e. pAB = pA + pB , when A and B are mutually exclusive events.
3
This assumption is realistic in the case relevance probabilities are estimated using the Okapi BM25 scoring schema, and has been already
introduced in [3].

756

