Predicting Escalations of Medical Queries
Based on Web Page Structure and Content
Ryen W. White and Eric Horvitz
Microsoft Research
One Microsoft Way, Redmond, WA 98052 USA

{ryenw, horvitz}@microsoft.com
ABSTRACT

2. IDENTIFYING QUERY ESCALATIONS

Logs of users’ searches on Web health topics can exhibit signs of
escalation of medical concerns, where initial queries about common symptoms are followed by queries about serious, rare illnesses. We present an effort to predict such escalations based on
the structure and content of pages encountered during medical
search sessions. We construct and then characterize the performance of classifiers that predict whether an escalation will occur
after the access of a page. Our findings have implications for
ranking algorithms and the design of search interfaces.

We studied anonymized logs of URLs visited by users who opted
in to provide data through a widely distributed browser toolbar.
Log entries include a user identifier, a timestamp for each page
view, and the URL of the page visited. Intranet and secure (https)
URL visits were excluded at source. Only entries generated in the
English speaking United States locale were included. From these
logs, we mined many thousands of search sessions. Sessions start
with a search engine query followed by a click on a search engine
result. We consider sessions to be a sequence of time-ordered
URLs terminating after 30 minutes of user inactivity (as in [7]).

Categories and Subject Descriptors

We define query escalations as observed increases in the medical
severity of search terms used within single health-related search
sessions. For the purpose of the study, we examined the query
terminology for sessions containing queries on six common symptoms: headache, chest pain, muscle twitches, abdominal pain,
nausea, and dizziness. We identified cases where users transition
from a query about one of these basic symptoms to queries on a
related, but serious illness within a search session. We focus on
two outcomes following a query about a basic symptom:

H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search
and Retrieval – search process, selection process

General Terms
Experimentation, Human Factors

Keywords
Medical search, cyberchondria

1. INTRODUCTION
Web search engines are used frequently by consumers to access
health information [4]. Although such retrieved information can
be invaluable, problems may arise when Web search is relied
upon for diagnosis, where queries describing symptoms are input
and rank and results are interpreted as diagnostic conclusions.
Prior research identified search and browsing sessions where queries on symptoms associated largely with common, benign explanations can lead to searches on more serious, rare ailments [7].
Such escalations may be based in several factors, including the
relatively large quantity of Web content describing serious illnesses versus benign explanations, and the potential use of ranking algorithms based on clickthrough data. Presenting people with
troubling health scenarios without information on the probabilities
of these outcomes, or on the typically greater likelihoods of more
common explanations, can heighten concerns inappropriately [6].

1. Next-query escalation: Following visits to pages after a query,
an escalation occurs on the next follow-up query.
2. Any-query escalation: Following visits to pages after a query,
an escalation occurs on any follow-up query within a session.
Lists of terms for expressing the six basic symptoms and terms for
expressing serious illnesses for each of the symptoms were constructed through review of the medical literature as well as the
browsing of portions of the search logs by the authors, one of
whom received medical training during a PhD/MD program (EH).
Lookup into these lists was used to identify candidate sessions and
escalations in the queries present in session logs.
Predicting escalations requires identifying non-escalations as well
as escalations. Non-escalations are defined in several ways:
1. Follow-up query is benign as explicitly defined.
2. Follow-up query not associated with defined escalation or nonescalation (hereafter called an undefined non-escalation).
3. Session terminates without escalation.
Figure 1 illustrates these definitions graphically, with ‫ ݍ‬as queries,
boxes as pages, and ܲ as the page from which features would be
generated in each case. In our study, we experiment with the prediction accuracy for each of these definitions of non-escalations.

Previous studies have explored the effects of factors such as page
design and content on the perceptions of health information seekers [3][5] and on actions such as self-diagnosis and self-treatment
[1], and have showed that, while 80% of American adults have
searched for healthcare information online, 75% refrain from
verifying key quality indicators such as source validity and source
creation date [4]. We focus here on predicting escalations in queries based on the structure and content of Web pages. We specifically build classifiers to predict whether an escalation will occur
immediately following a page visit. Accurate predictions of escalations in medical concerns given page features allows search
systems to flag specific pages as potential sources of inappropriate
anxiety or down-weight such pages in their result ranking.

3. PREDICTING ESCALATIONS
We constructed classifiers to predict whether a user’s next query
following a page visit contains an escalation or a non-escalation
based on features of that page. We built the models using logistic
regression, considering the outcome for each identified session
and a set of over 40 features representing attributes of the structure and content of pages. Space limitations preclude detailing the
entire feature list. However, in summary the features used include:

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

769

Table 1. Percentage of escalations versus non-escalations given
order of serious and benign conditions on the preceding page.
Order of presentation
Query outcome

Serious first

Benign first

Escalation
Non-escalation

68.6%
31.4%

33.4%
66.6%

Figure 1. Escalations and non-escalations in search sessions.
structural features (e.g., serious illness precedes benign explanation, number of words between serious illness and benign explanation, modifiers such as “unlikely to be” appear near serious
illnesses), title and URL features (e.g., title has serious illness, is
forum URL), first-person testimonials (e.g., page has phrases such
as “told me”, “I felt”, and “I am worried”), page reliability features (e.g., page is externally verified by healthonnet.org, recommends consulting physician), commercial intent features (e.g.,
page has advertisements, number of advertisement blocks), and
general page features (e.g., length in words, total kilobytes).

Figure 2. Receiver-operator characteristic curves.
serious illness precedes benign explanation in page, serious illness
vs. benign explanation appears in page title or near beginning of
page, page from Web forum, and page has external verification.

We used a set of six thousand Web pages sampled randomly from
our data. In initial analyses, we separately probed the predictive
value of single features. For example, we considered the influence
on escalation of the order in which serious illnesses versus benign
explanations appeared on the pages viewed (for pages containing
both serious illnesses and benign explanations). Table 1 shows the
boost in escalations associated with viewing pages that relay information about serious disorders before discussing benign explanations as compared with viewing pages with the reverse ordering. One explanation for this phenomenon is that users may not
read the full page (as supported by eye-tracking research [2]).

4. SUMMARY
We studied the prediction of escalations of queries for health information on the Web based on features of accessed pages. The
results have implications for the design of search engines that may
use escalation likelihood as a ranking feature or present this information to users. Future directions include the leveraging of the
richer rhetorical structure of page content to introduce additional
structural features. We also hope to investigate the predisposition
to escalate based on features of users, examine cumulative effects
of multiple session pages, and study the influence of contents
displayed on search results pages.

Each page is associated with an escalation or non-escalation in the
query immediately following it. We selected an equal number of
escalations and non-escalations (such that the accuracy of a marginal model that predicted escalation was 50%), and used fivefold cross-validation. Prediction accuracy varied with definitions
of escalation and non-escalation. The highest accuracy was obtained for next-query escalations and defined non-escalations
(73.4%), followed by next query escalation where non-escalation
is session end (70.7%), and next-query escalation where the escalation is undefined (68.8%), and finally any-query escalation
(65.5%). Performance differences were statistically significant (at
‫ < ݌‬.01) between all methods across 100 runs. Figure 2 shows the
receiver-operator characteristic curves for one of the runs.

REFERENCES
[1] Bengeri M. & Pluye P. (2003). Shortcomings of health-related
information on the internet. Health Prom Int., 18(4): 381-387.
[2] Buscher, G., Cutrell, E. & Morris, M.R. (2009). What do you
see when you’re surfing? Using eye tracking to predict salient
regions of web pages. SIGCHI, 21-30.
[3] Eysenbach, G. & Köhler, C. (2002). How do consumers
search for and appraise health information on the world wide
web? British Medical Journal 324: 573-577.
[4] Fox, S. (2006). Online health search 2006. Pew Internet and
American Life Project. Accessed January 2009.
[5] Sillence, E., Briggs, P., Fishwick, L. & Harris, P. (2004).
Trust and mistrust of online health sites. SIGCHI, 663-670.
[6] Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under uncertainty: heuristics and biases. Science, 185(4157): 1124-1131.
[7] White, R.W. & Horvitz, E. (2009). Cyberchondria: Studies of
the escalation of medical concerns in web search. TOIS, 23(4).

Our findings show that we can generate potentially valuable predictions about escalations using page features, and that accuracy
varies with the definition of escalations and non-escalations. Best
performance is obtained when non-escalations come from a defined set of benign explanations with no queries between concern
and escalation. The most predictive features for all models are:

770

