Clicked Phrase Document Expansion
for Sponsored Search Ad Retrieval
Dustin Hillard

Chris Leggetter

Yahoo! Inc
Great America Parkway
Santa Clara, CA, 95054

Yahoo! Inc
Great America Parkway
Santa Clara, CA, 95054

dhillard@yahoo-inc.com

cjl@yahoo-inc.com

ABSTRACT

is associated with each keyword and a second price auction
model determines how much the advertiser pays the search
engine for the click [3].
Most search engines typically take a two pronged approach
to the problem: (1) finding relevant ads for a query, and
(2) estimating CTR for the retrieved ads and appropriately
ranking those ads for display on the search page. In this
work we are largely concerned with the first point of discovering ads for a query.
Finding ads relevant to a query is an information retrieval
problem and the nature of the queries makes the problem
very similar to web-search, with some key differences. The
collection of web documents is significantly larger than the
advertiser database and retrieving candidate ads for infrequent queries is a very important area of research for sponsored search. A relevant sponsored search result may also
match the query in a broader sense than when compared to
web search: an ad for “limo rentals” could be a good match
to a query for “prom tux”, although the match would be too
coarse for a typical web search.
In this paper we present an approach for document expansion that improves retrieval of sponsored results by mining user click logs for high click-rate phrase translations.
We expand ad documents by automatically extracting title
phrases and then including query segments that have historically high click rates in the context of an ad’s title phrases.

We present a document expansion approach that uses Conditional Random Field (CRF) segmentation to automatically extract salient phrases from ad titles. We then supplement the ad document with query segments that are probable translations of the document phrases, as learned from
a large commercial search engine’s click logs. Our approach
provides a significant improvement in DCG and interpolated
precision and recall on a large set of human labeled query-ad
pairs.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Systems]: Information Search and Retrieval—General

General Terms
Algorithms, Experimentation

1.

INTRODUCTION

The primary source of revenue for major search engines
is textual advertising. A search engine typically displays
sponsored listings along with organic web-search results in
response to user queries. The revenue model for these listings is “pay-per-click” where the advertiser pays the search
engine only if the advertisement is clicked. A search engine
typically decides which ads to show (and in what order) by
optimizing revenue based on the probability that an ad will
be clicked, combined with the cost of the ad [5].
The advertiser “targets” specific keyword markets by bidding on search queries. An advertising campaign consists
of many ad groups where each ad group in turn consists
of a set of bidded phrases or keywords that the advertiser
bids on. A creative is associated with an ad group and is
composed of a title, a description and a display URL.
The title is typically 3-4 words in length and the description
has about 10-15 words.
An advertiser can choose to use standard or advanced
match for the keywords in an ad group. For example, enabling only standard match for the keyword “sports shoes”,
will result in the corresponding creative being shown only
for that exact query. Whereas, if the keyword is enabled for
advance match, the search engine can show the same ad for
the related queries “running shoes” or “track shoes”. A bid

2.

PHRASE-BASED
DOCUMENT EXPANSION

Our document expansion approach consists of three main
components: CRF segmentation of the user queries and ad
titles, collection of click-rate statistics for query-title segment pairs, and expanding ad documents by inserting high
click-rate query phrases.
Linear chain CRFs have been used successfully for many
sequential labeling tasks like segmentation and part-of-speech
tagging, as well as in web search[4]. CRFs are particularly
attractive because we can use arbitrary feature functions on
the observations. Let Q = q1 , q2 ...q3 denote an input query
and seg = y1 , y2 ...yn denote the corresponding state sequence. Each yi falls into one of two categories begin-segment
and end-segment. The conditional probability P (seg|Q) is
given as:
n
X X
1
exp{
λk
fk (yi−1 , yi , Q, i)}
p(seg|Q; Λ) =
Z(Q; Λ)
i
k
(1)
where fk (yi−1 , yi , Q, i) is a feature function and Λ = {λi } are

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

799

Figure 1: Interpolated Precision Recall

Figure 2: Precision Recall

the learned feature weights. We have several features based
on dictionaries of people names, celebrity names, stopword
lists and the top phrases in the query logs. We use the
CRF++ toolkit 1 to train the model. The model is trained in
a supervised fashion on 6000 queries annotated with phrases
by humans.
We then apply this segmentation model to two months of
sponsored search web logs, obtaining the top three hypotheses for every query and title. For each unique query-title
segment pair we count the number of user clicks and expected clicks, where expected clicks is a position normalized
count of impressions [6]. The result is a translation table of
click-rates for all observed query-title segment pairs.
Finally, for each title segment in an ad we augment our ad
document by adding all query segments that occurred in the
context of that title segment as confident translations (we
threshold on a click-rate of 1.5 and translation probability of
0.05, optimized on a held-out data set). In order to weight
the query segments according to their click-rate we multiply
their TF contribution by their click-rate in that context,
so that additional weight is given to segments with high
click rates. The final index contains ad documents expanded
with weighted query segments that either reinforce current
document phrases or add additional related phrases. Our
approach is related to much previous work in using search
logs as implicit relevance feedback (such as [2]), but our
novel contribution is to focus on CRF extracted phrase terms
and normalize clicks by expected clicks.

systems overlapped by about 60%). A total of about 30k
unique query-ad pairs were judged by human editors on a
standard five point relevance scale. The document expansion experiment provides a 8% relative gain for DCG@1, and
3% relative gain for DCG@3.
Figure 1 shows a 2% absolute gain in recall for the region
of higher recall performance. Figure 2 additionally shows
the document expansion has improved the classification accuracy in terms of detecting Bad ad documents. Classification is particularly important for sponsored search because
the retrieval stage typically presents an unordered candidate
set that is later re-ranked by a click model.

3.

4.

5.

RESULTS

Our baseline retrieval system is a TF-IDF based ad retrieval system similar to [1]. We index our advertiser database,
where each ad document consists of a title, description,
URL, and bid terms. Our experiments compare the standard baseline system to the document expansion approach
described in Section 2.
The test data contains 1k unique queries, which were selected based on a stratified sample of search engine traffic
that represents all ten search frequency deciles. An average
of 20 results per query were retrieved for the baseline and
experimental system (the retrieved documents from the two
1

CONCLUSION

We develop an approach to document expansion that utilizes automatic CRF phrase extraction, leverages normalized
click-rates from web logs, and augments ad documents with
weighted query phrases. The approach provides gains in
both relevance ranking and classification of relevant ads.

http://crfpp.sourceforge.net/

800

REFERENCES

[1] A. Z. Broder, D. Carmel, M. Herscovici, A. Soffer, and
J. Zien. Efficient query evaluation using a two-level
retrieval process. In CIKM. ACM, 2003.
[2] H. Cui, J.-R. Wen, J.-Y. Nie, and W.-Y. Ma.
Probabilistic query expansion using query logs. In
WWW, 2002.
[3] B. Edelman, M. Ostrovsky, and M. Schwarz. Internet
advertising and the generalized second-price auction:
Selling billions of dollars worth of keywords. American
Economic Review, 97(1), March 2007.
[4] X. Li, Y.-Y. Wang, and A. Acero. Extracting
structured information from user queries with
semi-supervised conditional random fields. In SIGIR,
pages 572–579, 2009.
[5] M. Richardson, E. Dominowska, and R. Ragno.
Predicting clicks: estimating the click-through rate for
new ads. In WWW, 2007.
[6] W. V. Zhang and R. Jones. Comparing click logs and
editorial labels for training query rewriting. In WWW
2007 Workshop on Query Log Analysis: Social And
Technological Challenges, 2007.

