Ontology-enriched Multi-Document Summarization
in Disaster Management
Lei Li, Dingding Wang, Chao Shen, Tao Li
School of Computing and Information Sciences
Florida International University
Miami, FL 33199

{lli003, dwang003, cshen001, taoli}@cs.fiu.edu

General Terms: Algorithms, Experimentation, Performance

yses are diﬃcult to capture the hidden semantic relationships between the sentences and queries. Ontology, with
abundant concise concepts and rich domain-related information, can capture the hidden semantic information.
In this poster, we develop a novel method, OMS, to generate query-relevant summary from a collection of documents
by making use of the ontology. In particular, OMS ﬁrst
links the sentences of documents being considered onto a
domain-related ontology, then maps the given query to a
speciﬁc node in the ontology, and ﬁnally extracts the summary from the sentences in the subtree rooted at the corresponding query node, by using FGB, a text summarization
approach described in [4]. As a byproduct, the summaries
we ﬁnally acquire can be represented as a tree showing the
hierarchical relationships of the extracted sentences.
We apply OMS to disaster management for evaluation.
For natural calamities, such as hurricanes and earthquakes,
vast amount of related news and reports are generated through
time for broadcasting and recording events. Experimental
results on such disaster management demonstrate the eﬃcacy of OMS.

Keywords: Ontology, Multi-Document Summarization, Disaster Management

2.

ABSTRACT
In this poster, we propose a novel document summarization approach named Ontology-enriched M ulti-Document
S ummarization(OMS ) for utilizing background knowledge
to improve summarization results. OMS ﬁrst maps the sentences of input documents onto an ontology, then links the
given query to a speciﬁc node in the ontology, and ﬁnally extracts the summary from the sentences in the subtree rooted
at the query node. By using the domain-related ontology,
OMS can better capture the semantic relevance between the
query and the sentences, and thus lead to better summarization results. As a byproduct, the ﬁnal summary generated
by OMS can be represented as a tree showing the hierarchical relationships of the extracted sentences. Evaluation
results on the collection of press releases by Miami-Dade
County Department of Emergency Management during Hurricane Wilma in 2005 demonstrate the eﬃcacy of OMS.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.3.3[Information
Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search and Retrieval

FRAMEWORK OVERVIEW

Figure 1 shows the framework of OMS. First of all, a domain speciﬁc ontology hierarchy was created by domain experts to describe concepts appearing in disaster related document sets. Given a collection of documents related to disasters, we disassemble them into a set of sentences. Then we
map these sentences onto the ontology hierarchy based on
their semantic correlations, discarding some sentences not
relevant to any concept in the ontology, and omitting from
the ontology some concepts with less importance.
Up to this point, we obtain an ontology-sentence tree representation in which each node is linked by a set of relevant
sentences. Given a query q, OMS links it to a speciﬁc node
i in the ontology-sentence tree according to the semantic
relationship between the query and the nodes, and extracts
a sub-hierarchy rooted at i. Then the FGB model [4] is
applied to summarize sentences linked to each node in this
subtree. Finally, a summary tree that satisﬁes the query q
is achieved.
Ontology Reﬁnement: In the ontology hierarchy, a
myriad of concepts relevant to disaster management documents are speciﬁed by domain experts. Given a subset of
documents, some concepts may not be predominant or even
not appear in this documents set. We need to reﬁne the
ontology hierarchy so that the ontology-sentence tree representation can better reﬂect the subject of the document set.

1. INTRODUCTION
Ontology is a philosophy concept, dealing with questions
about what entities exist or can be said to exist, and how
such entities can be grouped within a hierarchy, and subdivided according to their similarities and diﬀerences. Ontology has been applied in many research areas in information retrieval, particularly, in text mining. For example, D.
S´
𝑎nchez et al use the ontology to compute semantic similarity [1], and I. Yoo et al utilize the ontology to improve
document clustering [2]. However, relatively few research efforts have been reported on using the ontology for improving
document summarization.
Generally, given a query, multi-document summarization
is the process of generating a query-focused/relevant condensation (i.e., a generated summary) of the content of the entire input set. Existing summarization methods usually rank
the sentences in the documents according to their scores
calculated by a set of predeﬁned features, such as term
frequency-inverse sentence frequency (TF-ISF), sentence or
term position, and number of keywords [3]. The above analCopyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

819

To do so, we ﬁrst rank nodes at the same level in order of
sentence counts, then ignore the nodes and their subtrees
with sentence counts less than the average. By iteratively
running the above procedure in a top-down manner, a thematic ontology-sentence tree representation is generated.

block
set of documents

Public Service

Transit

Bus

Sentences

impair

Transit

Resident

People

School

the topics in eclipses are domain concepts, and the sentences
linked to them are summaries correlating to concepts. We
observe that (1) every summary in the summary tree concretely reﬂects the status of relevant concept; (2) summaries
generated by OMS exhibit apparent semantic hierarchy.

Visitor

Sentences

Resident

Visitor

3.3

…

Sentences

Bus

Transit
Rail

Airline

…

Sentences

query

sub-tree representation
Summary

Bus

Transit
Rail

Summary

summarize

Performance Evaluation

For performance evaluation, 42 queries related to some
speciﬁc concepts in the ontology are designed by domain experts for experimentation. In order to evaluate the quality
of the generated summaries by OMS and other methods, we
use human generated summaries as references. For hurricane
data, we hire 5 human labelers to manually create summaries
based on the selected document set and the given queries.
Then we run OMS on such document set; meanwhile, we
apply FGB [4] to automatically summarize query-relevant
documents without using ontology. The summarization results are evaluated by ROUGE, a document summarization
evaluation tool described in [5]. The experiment results are
shown in Table 1. The results indicate that summarization
eﬃcacy is signiﬁcantly improved by adopting ontology.

Ontology-sentence tree representation

Sentences

Airlines are not expected to resume
operations out of miami international
airport until late afternoon monday.

Figure 2: Summary tree related to transit

Hurricane
Public Service

Airline

Regular weekday service of
metrorail will begin Monday.

People

School

Rail

Regular bus service will be
implemented as streets are cleared.

ontology hierarchy

set of sentences

Sentences

Hurricane

Maimi-dade county transit continues to
recover from hurricane wilma
along with the rest of the county.

Transit

Airline

…

summary tree representation

Figure 1: OMS Framework

3. EXPERIMENTS

Measure
ROUGE-1
ROUGE-2
ROUGE-L
ROUGE-S
ROUGE-SU

3.1 Real World Data
The document set used in our experiments is a collection of press releases from Miami-Dade County Department
of Emergency Management and Homeland Security during
Hurricane Wilma from Oct. 19, 2005 to Nov. 4, 2005.
It contains approximately 1,700 documents, about half of
which contain similar contents. We randomly select 100 documents from this document set as our experiment data.
Data Preprocessing: For the sake of the theme embodiment of ontology-sentence tree representation, some sentences are removed from the whole sentences set in the procedure of sentence mapping, since they have no semantic
relationship with any ontology concept node. For example,
“For those outside of Miami Dade County can call (305) 4685900 to reach the Answer Center.” describes the phone number of the Answer Center; however, this kind of sentences
repeatedly appears in most disaster related documents we
are considering, and they have no speciﬁc meaning for summarization.

Using Ontology
AVG-R AVG-P
AVG-F
0.83236 0.75748 0.78326
0.77324 0.72221 0.74223
0.82032 0.75032 0.77512
0.76362 0.68136 0.70562
0.77299 0.68715 0.71202

Without Ontology
AVG-R AVG-P AVG-F
0.56601 0.47562 0.50340
0.43841 0.40197 0.41570
0.53661 0.46032 0.48460
0.43231 0.37311 0.39071
0.44875 0.38025 0.39913

Table 1: Summarization results comparison between OMS and FBG without using ontology. Remark: We use ROUGE-N, ROUGE-L, ROUGE-S
and ROUGE-SU, and compare F-scores of the two
diﬀerent methods.

Acknowledgements
The work is partially supported by an FIU Presidential Fellowship and NSF grants IIS-0546280 and HRD-0833093.

4.

REFERENCES

[1] D. S´
𝑎chez, M. Batet, A. Valls, and K. Gibert. Ontology-driven
web-based semantic similarity. Intelligent Information
Systems, October 2009.
[2] I. Yoo and X. Hu. Clustering large collection of biomedical
literature based on ontology-enriched bipartite graph
representation and mutual reﬁnement strategy. PAKDD, 2006.
[3] D. Jurafsky and J.H. Martin. Speech and Language
Processing. Pearson, second edition, 2008.
[4] D. Wang, S. Zhu, T. Li, Y. Chi, Y. Gong. Integrating
Clustering and Multi-Document Summarization to Improve
Document Understanding. CIKM, 2008
[5] C. Lin. Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of
summaries. Post-Conference Workshop of ACL, 2004.

3.2 An Illustrative Case Study
In order to illustrate the interpretability of our proposed
method, we provide an example of queries and the corresponding result generated by OMS. Figure 2 demonstrates
this case study.
Given the query “get all the information related to transit
in Miami-Dade County after Hurricane Wilma passed”, the
result is represented as a summary tree in Figure 2, in which

820

