Late Fusion of Compact Composite Descriptors
for Retrieval from Heterogeneous Image Databases
Savvas A. Chatzichristofis

Avi Arampatzis

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Democritus University of Thrace
Xanthi, Greece

schatzic@ee.duth.gr, avi@ee.duth.gr

ABSTRACT

Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.3.3 [Information
Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search and Retrieval—
retrieval models, search process; H.2.5 [Database Management]:
Heterogeneous Databases
General Terms: Measurement, Experimentation, Theory
Keywords: Image Retrieval, CCD, Fusion, Normalization, Combination

perform better than the MPEG-7 descriptors and other descriptors in the related literature.
The Brightness and Texture Directionality Histogram, or
BTDH, is proposed for grayscale and medical radiology images [7], and has been found to perform better than other
descriptors in several benchmarking databases. The recently
proposed Spatial Color Distribution (SpCD) combines color
information and its spatial distribution in a quantized histogram [9]. The SpCD is considered suitable for colored
graphics, since they contain a relatively small number of
colors and less texture regions than natural color images.
The quality of the aforementioned CCDs has so far been
evaluated in retrieval from homogeneous benchmarking databases, containing images of only the type that each CCD is
intended for. For example, the JCD is tested on NISTER [6]
and Wang databases which contain natural color images, the
BTDH on the IRMA database consisting of grayscale medical radiology images, and the SpCD on two benchmarking
databases with artificially generated images.
In this study, we evaluate the retrieval effectiveness of late
fusion techniques which enable the combined use of the JCD,
BTDH, and SpCD, on heterogeneous databases.

1.

2.

Compact composite descriptors (CCDs) are global image
features, capturing more than one types of information at
the same time in a very compact representation. Their quality has so far been evaluated in retrieval from several homogeneous databases containing images of only the type that
each CCD is intended for, and has been found better than
other descriptors in the literature such as the MPEG-7 descriptors. In this study, we consider heterogeneous databases
and investigate query-time fusion techniques for CCDs. The
results show that fusion is beneficial, even with simple score
normalization and combination methods due to the compatibility of the score distributions produced by the CCDs
considered.

INTRODUCTION

Fusion in image retrieval goes hand-in-hand with practical, viable system development, which is critical for the
future of image retrieval research [3]. Two main approaches
to fusion have been taken: early fusion, where multiple image descriptors are composed to form a new one before index
time [8], and late fusion, where result-lists from individual
descriptors are fused during query time [4, 5], as in text
meta-search. While early fusion has been common, late fusion still remains an under-explored possibility.
Compact Composite Descriptors (CCDs) are global image
features for content-based image retrieval. CCDs capture
more than one types of information at the same time in a
very compact representation. An example of early fusion is
the Joint Composite Descriptor (JCD), created by combining two CCDs [8]: the Color and Edge Directivity Descriptor (CEDD), and the Fuzzy Color and Texture Histogram
(FCTH). The CEDD and FCTH can be seen as products
of early fusion themselves, since they both combine color
and texture information. Both descriptors are developed for
color natural images, and experiments have shown that they

A CCD LATE FUSION EXPERIMENT

We created a heterogeneous database with 20230 images
by joining the following: 9000 grayscale images from the
IRMA 2005 database; 10200 natural color images from the
NISTER database and 1030 artificially generated images
from the Flags database [9].
We used 40 queries: The first 20 natural color image
queries from the NISTER database and the first 20 grayscale
queries of the IRMA 2005 database.
Fusion methods consist of a score normalization and a
score combination component. We mainly focus on the normalization, using each time the combination method more
natural to the normalization at hand, although we investigated other possibilities in initial experiments not reported
here. Five fusion methods were tested:
• CombSUM: It is the addition of all scores per image,
without normalization.
• BC+CombSUM: Borda Count originates from social
theory in voting. The image with the highest rank on
each ranked-list gets n votes, where n is the collection
size. Each subsequent rank gets one vote less than
the previous. Votes across ranked-lists are naturally
combined with CombSUM.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

825

• Z-score+CombSUM: Z-score is a linear normalization
per query which maps each score to its number of standard deviations above or below the mean score. It is
more suitable for non-skewed score distributions (SDs)
where the mean would make more sense. In this respect, we also tried it with the median score instead of
the mean. We present results with CombSUM; we also
tried multiplication, but it gave inferior performance.
• IRP: The Inverse Rank Position merges ranked lists
in the decreasing order of the inverse of the sum of
inverses of individual ranks.

Figure 1: SDs of the three CCDs for 2 queries.

3.

• HIS+multiplication: HIS is a non-linear normalization
which maps each score to the probability of a historical
query scoring a collection image below that score. It is
recently proposed by [1] and found to be robust and effective in a distributed retrieval testbed. As historical
queries we used 50 images drawn randomly from the
database. Since HIS returns probabilities, the natural
combination would be multiplication; addition gave inferior results in initial experiments.
We evaluate with two measures: the Average Normalized
Modified Retrieval Rank (ANMRR), and the Mean Average
Precision (MAP). ANMRR is the evaluation measure used
in all the MPEG-7 color core experiments; it ranges between
0 and 1, with 0 being the maximum effectiveness.
Since the goal of fusion is to achieve better results than
those achieved by any of the CCDs in isolation, we use the
performance of SpCD as baseline, as shown in Table 1.
Descriptor / Fused
JCD
BTDH
SpCD
CombSUM
BC + CombSUM
Z-score with Mean + CombSUM
Z-score with Median + CombSUM
IRP
HIS + multiplication

4.

MAP
0.5899
0.5555
0.6311

0.2491
0.2678
0.2400
0.2420
0.2729
0.2664

0.7121
0.6848
0.7194
0.7193
0.6674
0.6846

REFERENCES

[1] A. Arampatzis and J. Kamps. A signal-to-noise
approach to score normalization. In CIKM, pages
797–806. ACM, 2009.
[2] A. Arampatzis, S. Robertson, and J. Kamps. Score
distributions in information retrieval. In ICTIR, volume
5766 of LNCS, pages 139–151. Springer, 2009.
[3] R. Datta, D. Joshi, J. Li, and J. Wang. Image retrieval:
Ideas, influences, and trends of the new age. ACM
Computing Surveys, 40(2):1–60, 2008.
[4] M. Jovic, Y. Hatakeyama, F. Dong, and K. Hirota.
Image retrieval based on similarity score fusion from
feature similarity ranking lists. In FSKD, volume 4223
of LNCS, pages 461–470. Springer, 2006.
[5] M. Bleschke , R. Madonski and R. Rudnicki. Image
retrieval system based on combined mpeg-7 texture and
colour descriptors. In MIXDES, pages 635 – 639, 2009.
[6] D. Nister and H. Stewenius. Scalable recognition with a
vocabulary tree. In Proc. CVPR, volume 5, pages
2161–2168. Citeseer, 2006.
[7] S. A. Chatzichristofis and Y. S. Boutalis. Content
based radiology image retrieval using a fuzzy rule based
scalable composite descriptor. Multimedia Tools and
Applications, 46:493–519, 2010.
[8] S. A. Chatzichristofis, Y. S. Boutalis, and M. Lux.
Selection of the proper compact composite descriptor
for improving content based image retrieval. In
SPPRA, pages 134–140. ACTA Press, 2009.
[9] S. A. Chatzichristofis, Y. S. Boutalis and M. Lux.
SpCD—spatial color distribution descriptor. A fuzzy
rule based compact composite descriptor appropriate
for hand drawn color sketches retrieval. In ICAART,
pages 58–63, 2010.

40 Queries
ANMRR
0.3554
0.4015
0.3081

CONCLUSIONS

We investigated methods for fusing retrieval results obtained from an heterogeneous image database using multiple
descriptors individually. This type of fusion, known as late
fusion, is found to be a viable method for retrieving from
heterogeneous databases, which improves effectiveness over
single descriptor baselines even with simple score normalization and combination methods.
While [2] postulates that effective normalization methods
should be non-linear taking into account the shape of SDs—
especially for non-text descriptors where a wilder variety of
SDs is assumed—we found these claims to be not necessarily true. By using compatible descriptors from the family
of CCDs, combining by adding bare or linearly normalized
scores with Z-score works best.

Table 1: Experimental Results.
All fusion methods beat the baseline. Best effectiveness
overall is achieved by Z-score which beats the baselines of
the individual CCDs by wide margins. Both versions (with
the mean or median) perform similarly.
While HIS performs better than IRP and close to BC, it
lacks behind Z-score and the bare CombSUM. We tried using more than 50 historical queries (up to 1000) in order to
deduce smoother normalization functions, but the effectiveness of HIS did not improve. This is in line with [1], where
50 queries were deemed sufficient to achieve a performance
plateau.
The performance of the bare CombSUM is remarkable.
Although it is considered a naive method [2], it is found
effective and robust. On a further investigation it turned
out that the reason for this is the similarity of the SDs, in
both shape and range, across the CCDs (Fig. 1).

826

