Inferring User Intent in Web Search by Exploiting Social
Annotations
Jose M. Conde, David Vallet, Pablo Castells
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid
Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain

jose.conde@estudiante.uam.es,{david.vallet, pablo.castells}@uam.es
the user that can be leveraged in subsequent queries of a search
session. Here we investigate the application of such techniques to
a folksonomy-based representation of Web documents.

ABSTRACT
In this paper, we present a folksonomy-based approach for implicit user intent extraction during a Web search process. We
present a number of result re-ranking techniques based on this
representation that can be applied to any Web search engine. We
perform a user experiment the results of which indicate that this
type of representation is better at context extraction than using the
actual textual content of the document.

This use of social tagging information for user intent extraction
has not been investigated in depth before. An initial approach to
the exploitation of Delicious as a context source has been presented by Schmidt et al. [3], who extract the tags related to the
documents opened by the user, and apply them in query expansion, using an ad-hoc decay factor that gives more importance to
recently opened documents. However, no evaluation is provided
in this work, so the feasibility of folksonomy-based context representation lacks a formal empirical study, to the best of our knowledge. Rather than on query expansion [3],[5], our approach is
based on result re-ranking, as we focus on raising the precision of
the top results presented to the user rather than improving recall,
as users are prone to only inspect the top results returned by Web
search engines. We also investigate more formal context construction strategies [5], such as the ostensive model [2].

Categories and Subject Descriptors H.3.3 Information Search
and Retrieval – retrieval models, information filtering.
General Terms Algorithms, Experimentation.
Keywords Web search, folksonomy, context.

1. INTRODUCTION
With the advent of the Web 2.0, social tagging systems have
exponentially grown both in terms of users and contents. These
systems encourage users to tag different types of content items in
a way that enhances their organization and sharing. The domains
of these systems are varied, including music (e.g., Last.fm), photo
streams (e.g. Flickr), or Web pages (e.g. Delicious). However,
even with the aid of currently available tools, users still have
problems accessing the ever increasing information available on
the Web, which is known as the information overload problem.

Similar to [1],[4], we exploit Delicious as the social annotation
corpus to improve Web search, but we focus on providing a context-aware search to the user, rather than implementing a popularity measure [1] or a personalized search [4]. Differently from [4],
our approach does not require the user to have a valid user profile
in the system. Instead, we build a short term profile at runtime,
based on the implicit information provided by the user during the
search process and the available tagging information provided by
users of the social tagging service.1

Personalized and contextualized content access has aimed in
recent years to alleviate the information overload problem on the
Web by taking both long and short term interests of users into
account. Additionally, the underlying semantic information generated by users in social tagging systems, known as folksonomies,
has enabled the research and development of new effective retrieval and personalized methods. Folksonomies have been recently exploited in order to, for instance, improve [1] or personalize
[4] Web search, by exploiting the implicit user and document
profiles that can be extracted by mining the social tagging actions
of users.

2. A Folksonomy-based Context Model
We define a folksonomy F as a tuple F = T, U, D, A, where
T =  , … ,   is the set of tags that comprise the vocabulary
expressed by the folksonomy, U =   , … ,  and D =
  , … ,  are respectively the set of users and the set of documents that annotate and are annotated with the tags of T, and
A =⊂ U × T × D is the set of annotations of the form
  ,  ,   where  is a tag assigned by a user  to a document
 by a user . The profile of document  is defined as a vector

 =  , , … , , , where , = | ,  ,   ∈ A| ∈ U| is
the number of times the document has been annotated with tag  .
In our Web search scenario, the set of documents D represents
the resources present on the Web, and are identified by a URL.

In this paper, we investigate whether social tagging systems can
be a new information source for the runtime construction and
representation of users’ search intent, i.e. if this information can
be interpreted as a new source of (implicit) search context. We
focus our research on Web search and the use of Delicious1, a
social bookmarking service. We hypothesize that social tagging
systems such as Delicious can be a valuable source of information
in order to elucidate the semantics involved in the search process
of the user. Context-aware models based on implicit feedback rely
on processing the content of the executed queries and accessed
documents by users during search activities [5]. This information
is used to build a representation of the current search context of

In order to represent the search process of the user, we define a
query trail,  = ,   , … ,  ,  ∈ D, as a query  and an
ordered set of documents in the result set that the user has accessed after issuing the query. We can then define a session trail,
 =  , … , !  as an ordered set of query trails that are related

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

1

827

Delicious - Social bookmarking, http://delicious.com/

was 38% for accessed documents and 51% for accessed documents
that users marked as relevant.

to the current search session of the user. When the user executes a
query, the current session trail can be analyzed in order to infer a
folksonomy-based representation of the user’s search context.

Figure 1 presents the results of the evaluation. In order to test our
hypothesis, we compare the ranking results of the approaches
presented in the previous section (tag source) with the same approaches when using the actual textual content of the documents as
its representation (text source). The combination of both sources is
not shown as it did not produce better results. As a baseline, we use
the original ranking provided by Bing (baseline). Some of the
evaluated approaches were our representation techniques with
varying values of ': ' = 0.5 (ostensive), ' = 1.0 (accumulated),
and ' = 1.5 (begin). These three techniques used the 4-6 4
weighing function. We also show the performance of the accumulated technique with the time weighting factor (acum + time). In
addition, we adapted the technique presented by Schmidt et al. [3],
although their work was originally designed for query expansion.
As a metric we show MAP at a cut-off point of the top 50 results.
Other metrics such as P@10 and NDCG give similar results.
Table 1: MAP@50 performance of context-aware techniques

We define a context representation C , t #  as a weighting function that scores the importance of a given tag t # based on its degree
of relation to the user’s current session trail . We based our
context representation techniques on the ostensive model [2]:
$%  , t #  = ∑0! ' !( ∙ ∑+,∈-./ *

,  ,

where ' is a weight factor that takes into consideration the order of
the query trails, i.e. how recently within the current session the
query trails occurred. * ,  is a weighting function that indicates
how well tag  represents document  . By varying the ' parameter we can obtain different implicit context representation models
[5]. For instance, for ' < 1 the context function represents the
standard ostensive model [2], where documents that the user opened
recently are taken more into consideration for the context representation. In this case ' is regarded as a reduction factor. With ' = 1
we represent an accumulative model where all opened documents
have the same importance when representing the user’s context.
With an ' > 1 documents opened at the beginning of the search
session have more importance when representing the user’s context.
We analyze two different weighting functions: 1) a weighting function 4-6 4  ,  , that uses the 4-6 4 value of a tag using , as
the frequency value; and 2) a weighting function that takes also into
consideration the viewing time of the document, by multiplying the
previous function by a factor   , given by the time in seconds
that the user spent viewing the document.

Sour
ce
tag
text

In order to test different context-aware adaptation techniques, we
defined three search tasks and monitored 14 users while performing
each task for 15 minutes. The tasks were performed on a common
Web browser. All user interactions were collected using a query and
action log toolbar2. In order to act as a baseline, we instructed users
to use Microsoft’s Bing3 Web search engine when performing a
Web search. As a way to obtain relevance judgments, users were
instructed to bookmark those results they found interesting for their
tasks, but they were not asked to find as many relevant documents
as they could. Our intention was that users deviate as little as possible from their normal search methodology. The three search tasks
were designed to emulate common search situations. These were: 1)
planning a holiday trip; 2) searching for a new electronic product
you are interested in buying; and 3) an open task were users could
search on any topic of their interest. When each task was finished
users had 5 additional minutes to judge an aggregated list of results
that appeared during their search session, in order for us to obtain
more relevance judgements. The above information constituted our
evaluation topics. It is worth noting that the coverage of Delicious
Lemur toolbar: http://www.lemurproject.org/querylogtoolbar/
Microsoft Bing: http://www.bing.com

osten
0.1005
0.0881

[3]
0.0998
0.0880

acum
0.0998
0.0880

begin
0.1005
0.0887

acum+ti
me
0.1013
0.0870

To conclude, we have presented a number of approaches in order
to evaluate folksonomy-based context representation techniques.
Our results validate our hypothesis that the folksonomy-based
representation and exploitation of the user context is more effective
than traditional approaches based on the content of the document.

3. EXPERIMENTS

3

0.0969

The results show that the context-aware approaches had significantly better results when using the folksonomy-based representation of documents than their actual content. These differences were
statistically significant for all approaches (Wilcoxon, p< 0.05).
Additionally, only the folksonomy-based approaches resulted in an
improvement over the baseline, also with statistical significance.
From the analysis of the results we can conclude that in our experiment the variations of the ' parameter produced no significant
effect. The best performing approach was the combination of the
accumulated approach and the time sensitive weighting function,
which achieved a 15% improvement over the best technique based
on textual content and a 4.5% increase over the baseline.

We then use this context representation to re-rank the results of
the Web search system. Result documents are re-ordered by the
similarity value between the document  and the current context
of the user, taking into account the original ranking. We define
this similarity value as a scalar product: 67  ,  = ∑ , ∙
$8  , t  . Finally, in order to take into account the actual query
of the user, the new ordered result list is aggregated with the
original result list using CombSUM with rank based normalization.

2

baseline

4. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research was partially supported by the Spanish Ministry of
Science and Education (TIN2008-06566-C04-02) and the Regional
Government of Madrid (S2009TIC-1542).

5. REFERENCES
[1] Bao, S., Xue, G., Wu, X., Yu, Y., Fei, B., and Su, Z. Optimizing web search using social annotations. In WWW '07,
pages 501-510, 2007.
[2] Campbell, I. and van Rijsbergen, C. J.. The ostensive model
of developing information needs. In COLIS’96, pages 251268, 1996.
[3] Schmidt, K. U., Sarnow, T., and Stojanovic, L. Socially filtered web search: an approach using social bookmarking tags
to personalize web search. In SAC'09, pages 670-674, 2009.
[4] Xu, S., Bao, S., Fei, B., Su, Z., Yu, Y. Exploring folksonomy
for personalized search. In SIGIR’08, pages 155-162, 2008.
[5] White, R. W., Ruthven, I., Jose, J. M., and Van Rijsbergen,
C. J. Evaluating implicit feedback models using searcher simulations. ACM TOIS., 23(3), pages 325-361, 2005.

828

