multi Searcher: Can We Support People to Get Information
from Text They Can’t Read or Understand?
Farag Ahmed

Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg
Data & Knowledge Engineering Group
39106 Magdeburg, Germany

farag.ahmed@ovgu.de

Andreas Nürnberger

Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg
Data & Knowledge Engineering Group
39106 Magdeburg, Germany

andreas.nuernberger@ovgu.de

ABSTRACT
The goal of the proposed tool multi Searcher is to answer
this research question: can we expect people to be able to get
information from text in languages they can not read or understand? The proposed tool multi Searcher provides users
with interactive contextual information that describes the
translation in the user’s own language so that the user has
a certain degree of conﬁdence about the translation. Therefore, the user is considered as an integral part of the retrieval
process. The tool provides possibilities to interactively select relevant terms from contextual information in order to
improve the translation and thus improve the cross lingual
information retrieval (CLIR) process.

”query assistant” shows how the translated query term translates back into the source language in order to support those
users who do not understand the target language. In Keizai,
users have to select appropriate translations after examining source language deﬁnitions of each possible translation
before the search is conducted. An important property of
MIRACLE is the immediate feedback in response to any
action (selecting/deselecting proposed translations), which
gives the user an opportunity to reﬁne the search. The MultiLexExplorer [2] follows a diﬀerent strategy: it allows users
to explore combinations of query term translations by visualizing EuroWordNet relations together with search results
and search statistics obtained from web search engines.

Categories and Subject Descriptors

2. THE PROPOSED TOOL

H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information
Search and Retrieval—Query formulation, Search process

multi Searcher deals with several CLIR issues. Firstly,
there is translation ambiguity, i.e. one word in one language
can have several meanings in another language. Secondly,
the user’s lack of knowledge in the target language. Here,
the tool supports the user by providing interactive contextual information that describes the translation in the user’s
language. Due to the availability of the language resources
needed for Arabic (dictionary and parallel corpora aligned
at sentence level1 ) English was selected as test languages.

General Terms
Algorithms, Performance, Experimentation, Human Factors

Keywords
cross lingual information retrieval, word sense disambiguation, Arabic

1.

2.1 Translation Disambiguation

CLIR INTERACTION TOOLS

The translation process starts by translating the query
terms; a set of possible translations of each of the query
terms are obtained from the dictionary. Based on the translation sets of each term, sets of all possible combinations
between terms in the translation sets are generated. Using
co-occurrence data extracted from monolingual corpora1 ,
the translations are then ranked based on a cohesion score
computed using Mutual Information (MI): Given a query
q = {q1 , q1 , ..., qn }, and its translation set Sqk = {qk , ti },
where 1 ≤ k ≤ n, 1 ≤ i ≤ mk and mk is the number of
translations for query term k. The MI score of each translation combination can be computed as follows:

The increasing diversity of internet web sites has created
millions of multilingual resources in the World Wide Web.
Therefore, there is an urgent need to bridge barriers between languages in order to access this ﬂood of multilingual information. In the past little attention was paid to
develop multilingual interaction tools where users are really considered as an integral part of the retrieval process.
However, the involvement of the user in CLIR systems by
reviewing and amending the query had been studied, e.g.,
using Keizai [4], Mulinex [1] and recently MIRACLE [3].
These interfaces provide query translation from the source
language into the target languages using bilingual dictionaries. Furthermore, they use a sort of ”query assistant”, which
enables interactive disambiguation of the query translation
process: supporting the user in selecting the correct translations out of a list of possible translations. In Mulinex the

M I(qt1 , qt2 , ..., qtn ) = log2

P (qt1 , qt2 , ..., qtn )
p(qt1 )p(qt2 )...p(qtn )

(1)

with P (qt1 , qt2 , ..., qtn ) being the joint probability of all translated query terms to occur together, which is estimated by
counting how many times qt1 , qt2 , ..., qtn occur together in
the corpora. The probabilities p(qt1 )p(qt2 )...p(qtn ) are esti-

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

1

837

see www.nongnu.org/aramorph and www.ldc.upenn.edu

mated by counting the number of individual occurrences of
each possible translated query term in the corpora.

2.2 Interactive Contextual Information (ICI)
When the user query is translated, it is looked up in the
target language documents index in order to obtain the relevant documents (contextual information) for the translation. In order to get the equivalent documents in the source
language the parallel corpora is queried. Since it is possible that some retrieved documents will be very similar –
which would result in duplicate contextual information – the
documents retrieved from the source language are automatically grouped and contextual information is selected only
once from each cluster. As shown in Fig. 1, the ﬁnally
selected contextual information is not provided to the user
as raw text, but instead a classiﬁed representation of each
contextual information term will be presented: each term
of the contextual information is colored according to its related type and can be selected as disambiguating term (the
user’s query terms green, suggested terms by the tool based
on high frequent co-occurrences in the context of the query
bold blue and underlined, all remaining terms blue except
stop words that are not selectable and black). For example, consider the following case where the user submitted

the Arabic query ” 
 dyen alh.kwmh ”. The query

Figure 1: The translation alternatives with their
contexual information in the source language.

the ambiguous word. The evaluation has been performed
using monolingual corpora over the 20 test queries. The
applicability and precision were 80% and 70%, respectively.
The tool has been initially tested by 5 users who have (no
knowledge or little knowledge) about the target language.
The results were very encouraging, in that the tool could
give the users a certain degree of conﬁdence about the translation. Furthermore, the possibility to interactively select
term/terms from the contextual information in order to improve the translation was praised.



term ”  alh.kwmh ” has two translations (the government or the administration), while the other term ”  dyen
” has several possible translations .e.g. (Religion) or (Debt).
Based on the M I score translation alternatives are displayed
in ranked order together with their contextual information.
Thus the user has the possibility to select the suitable translation. Here, the translations provided by the system (the
government religion) and (the government debt) are correct
even though they are used in a diﬀerent context. This is
due to the fact that (government) appears frequently in the
context of ”religion” or ”debt”. As shown in Fig. 1, the
user is interested in the second ranked translation (debt
government). Using the contextual information, the user
can select one or more terms to improve the translation. To
simplify the user’s task, the tool automatically proposed relevant terms (highlighted in bold blue and underlined), .e.g.,
(”payment”, ”ﬁnancial”, ”lending”, ”loan”). Once the user

selects, for example, the interactive term ”  āqrād. ” (loan
or lending), the tool re-translates the modiﬁed query and
displays the new translations (”debt government loan”, ”debt
government lending” and ”debt administration loan”), to the
user. Using search engine integrated web services, the user
can, with a simple mouse click, conﬁrm the translation which
will then be sent to his favorite search engine, retrieving the
results and displaying them.

3. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We proposed a context-based CLIR tool, to support the
user, in having a certain degree of conﬁdence about the
translation. It provides the user with interactive contextual
information in order to involve her/him in the translation
process. The translation ambiguity was taken into account
by the use of a MI score based approach. Experiments about
the accuracy of the tool proved that the tool has a certain
degree of translation accuracy. In addition, a small pilot
user study (5 participants) was conducted. A larger user
study has already been designed and is underway.

4. REFERENCES
[1] J. Capstick, A. K. Diagne, G. Erbach, H. Uszkoreit,
A. Leisenberg, and M. Leisenberg. A system for
supporting cross-lingual information retrieval. Inform.
Proc. and Management, 36(2):275–289, 2000.
[2] E. W. D. Luca, S. Hauke, A. Nürnberger, and
S. Schlechtweg. MultiLexExplorer - combining
multilingual web search with multilingual lexical
resources. In Combined Works. on Language-enhanced
Educat. Techn. and Devel. and Eval. of Robust Spoken
Dialogue Sys., pages 71–21, 2006.
[3] D. W. Oard, D. He, and J. Wang. User-assisted query
translation for interactive cross-language information
retrieval. Inform. Proc. and Management,
44(1):181–211, 2008.
[4] W. C. Ogden and M. W. Davis. Improving
cross-language text retrieval with human interactions.
In 33rd Hawaii Intl. Conf. on System Sciences,
volume 3, page 3044, 2000.

2.3 Evaluation
We selected randomly 20 Arabic queries from the corpora
that included at least one ambiguous word having multiple
translations. The number of senses per test word ranged
from 1 to 14, and the average was 4.3. The number of query
translation combinations ranged from 4 to 200 with the average being 29.1. In order to evaluate the performance of
the tool, we used two measurements: applicability and precision. The applicability is the proportion of the ambiguous
words that the algorithm could disambiguate. The precision
is the proportion of the corrected disambiguated senses of

838

