Query Log Analysis in the Context of Information Retrieval
for Children
Sergio Duarte Torres

Djoerd Hiemstra

Pavel Serdyukov

University of Twente
The Netherlands

University of Twente
The Netherlands

Delft University
The Netherlands

duartes@cs.utwente.nl

hiemstra@cs.utwente.nl

ABSTRACT

Table 1: Most frequent children queries

In this paper we analyze queries and sessions intended to
satisfy children’s information needs using a large-scale query
log. The aim of this analysis is twofold: i) To identify differences between such queries and sessions, and general queries
and sessions; ii) To enhance the query log by including annotations of queries, sessions, and actions for future research
on information retrieval for children. We found statistically
significant differences between the set of general purpose and
queries seeking for content intended for children. We show
that our findings are consistent with previous studies on the
physical behavior of children using Web search engines.

1) nickjr.com
2) elmo
3) nick jr

2.

4) coloring pages
5) postopia
6) candystand

7) the wiggles
8) starfall.com
9) dora the explorer

CHILDREN QUERIES & SESSIONS

The AOL query log [5] contains approximately 36 million
entries. We represent this query log as the set:
Log = hhui , qi , ti , di , ri i | 1 ≤ i ≤ ni

(1)

where u, q, t, d, r refers to the user ID, query, time of submission, domain clicked and its rank position respectively, n
defines the size of the query log.
The identification of queries employed to retrieve content for children was performed by matching the DMOZ
kids&teens entries tagged for kids (which point to appropriate Web content for children up to 12 years old) with
the clicked domains of the query log. Given that the query
log does not include the entire URL visited, matches were
restricted to the cases in which only the domain is listed
as DMOZ entry. The set of these queries is represented by
Equation 2.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Query formulation

General Terms
Experimentation, Measurement

Keywords
query log analysis, query intent, query representation

1.

p.serdyukov@tudelft.nl

Kids = hhui , qi , ti , di , ri i | di ∈ DM OZkids i

INTRODUCTION

(2)

Sessions were constructed by grouping contiguous queries
from the same user that are submitted with a time difference
smaller than θ. A formal definition of session is shown in
Equation 3.

The Internet today is widely used by children for information and communication purposes. Unfortunately, most
of the current Information Retrieval (IR) systems are designed for adults who have shown to have different search approaches and cognitive skills than children [1]. Thus, there is
an increasing need for research aimed at understanding children’s search characteristics and to provide them suitable
IR systems. Query logs are valuable resources to explore
the search behavior of users and have been found highly
useful to improve their search experience. In this study, we
employed the AOL query log and the DMOZ kids&teens
directory to identify differences in the queries and sessions
employed by users to retrieve children and general-purpose
information. This comparison also allows us to confirm on a
large-scale environment previous findings in children physical search on Web search engines [1]. It is important to
mention that we are aware of the controversy of the usage
of this query log in the research community. For this reason
we clarify that no actual user identification is carried out in
any of the experiments performed in our study.

S = hhqi1 , ui1 , ti1 i , ..., hqik , uik , tik ii

(3)

where ui1 = ... = uik , ti1 ≤ ... ≤ tik and tij+1 − tij ≤ tθ for
all j = 1, 2..., k − 1 The parameter tθ was set to 30 minutes
because it is the most common value employed in the literature [4]. This time window is also suitable for sessions expressing children’s information needs since it has been shown
that on average children spend up to 16 minutes to fulfill an
information need [2]. We define a children session as a session that contains at least one children query entry.
The data collected contains 485,561 query entries (10,252
unique queries) and 21,009 sessions. The most frequent
queries are shown in Table 1. Note that although it is not
possible to establish if these queries were submitted by children, we are still able to study the characteristics of the
queries and sessions for which the underlying information
need is related to children content. We consider that this
assumption is reasonable since the DMOZ kids directory
employed to identify these queries is realistic and of high
quality.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

847

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

Figure 1: Length frequency

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Figure 2: Rank frequency

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

12

14

FINDINGS SUMMARY

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

All
Kids

0.0

0.4

3

Figure 3: Session length

0

10

20

30 40

60

80

1000

Sessions duration (minutes)

Figure 4: Session duration

judgment is made [2]. This result can also indicate that the
documents retrieved by the search engine are not sufficient
to satisfy the user’s information need.

3.4

Session duration analysis

The duration distribution in minutes of children and generalpurpose sessions are shown in Figure 4. This figure shows
that users require more time to explore and complete information needs associated to children content, which suggests
more difficulty to solve the information tasks associated to
these sessions. This results is consistent with the greater
amount of queries and clicks on lower ranked pages found in
the children queries. Interestingly, the mean duration found
for the children’s sessions (20.38 minutes) is in line with the
average time reported by Bilal et al.[2] for children that were
unsuccessful completing fact-based information tasks (19.69
minutes).

Query length analysis

4.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This research is funded in by PuppyIR, a project in the
European Union’s 7th Framework ICT Programme under
grant agreement no. 231507.

5.

Click analysis

The rank distribution of clicks was collected to compare
the retrieval performance between children and general purpose queries. Queries in which highly ranked domains are
more often clicked indicate that information needs are more
efficiently satisfied by the IR system. Figure 2 shows the
rank frequency distribution of clicks. This figure demonstrates that on average the retrieval performance of the children queries is poorer than the queries used to retrieve generalpurpose content since clicks on lower ranked results are more
frequent in the children query set (5.77 vs 3.58 average rank).
We also observed an important drop for the children queries
on the clicks ranked as 10. This can be explained by the fact
that children refuse to go beyond the first page more often
than older users [3].

3.3

2

Session length (# entries)

Query length is an indicator of the complexity of the query
and the difficulty of the user to express information needs
using keywords. Queries that were used to retrieve information for children were on average (3.23 words per query)
significantly longer than the average of the queries in the
whole query log (2.5 words per query) as illustrated Figure
1. Interestingly, this finding is in-line with Druin et al.[3]
studies in which children aged 8 to 12 are found to formulate longer queries. A more frequent formulation of queries
using natural language constructs have also been found in
children search behavior [1]. We verified this observation by
extracting adjectival and verbal phrases from the queries.
We found that 65% of the children retrieval queries contain
either of these phrases compared to 56% of the queries in the
whole query log. We also found a greater use of questions
in the former queries (3.92% vs 2.71%).

3.2

0.3
1

Cumulative Frequency

0.5

11

Rank position

The analysis was carried out at the query and session level.
Query length and domain rank data of the clicked domains
were considered for the former and session length, duration
and query reformulations for the latter. All the results found
for the kid queries are significantly different from the queries
of the whole log using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test and the
t-test at the 95% confidence level.

3.1

0.2

Frequency

0.0
1

Query length

All
Kids

0.1

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.0

1

3.

All
Kids

0.1

Frequency

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

Frequency

All
Kids

Sessions length analysis

Figure 3 shows that sessions used to retrieve information
for children are longer than general-purpose sessions. The
longer average length found for the children sessions (8.76
vs 2.8 query entries per session) suggests that these users
were not certain of the relevance of the information found
since they had to perform more queries and explore more
documents. This result is consistent with Bilal’s findings [2]
in which children showed nonlinear navigation style when
solving search tasks. This search style is characterized by
the exploration of several choices before a final relevance

848

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

This work represents a valuable methodology to study
the search behavior of user’s pursuing children information
needs given that our findings are in-line with previous studies of children information-seeking behavior on web search
engines [1, 2, 3]. This method has also been proved adequate
to corroborate on a large-scale setting the results drawn by
case-studies on small group of users and can be applied to
characterize the search behavior of different user groups. We
have enriched the AOL query log by annotating the children
queries and session information based on this study and as
future work we will employ this resource to study query
assistance methods to improve the search experience of children.

6.

REFERENCES

[1] D. Bilal. Children’s use of the yahooligans! web search engine:
Ii. cognitive and physical behaviors on research tasks. J. Am.
Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol., 52(2):118–136, 2001.
[2] D. Bilal. Children’s use of the yahooligans! web search engine.
iii. cognitive and physical behaviors on fully self-generated search
tasks. J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol., 53(13):1170–1183, 2002.
[3] A. Druin, E. Foss, L. Hatley, E. Golub, M. L. Guha, J. Fails,
and H. Hutchinson. How children search the internet with
keyword interfaces. In IDC ’09: Proceedings of the 8th
International Conference on Interaction Design and Children,
pages 89–96, New York, NY, USA, 2009. ACM.
[4] R. Jones and K. L. Klinkner. Beyond the session timeout:
automatic hierarchical segmentation of search topics in query
logs. In CIKM ’08, pages 699–708. ACM, 2008.
[5] G. Pass, A. Chowdhury, and C. Torgeson. A picture of search. In
InfoScale ’06: Proceedings of the 1st international conference
on Scalable information systems, page 1, New York, NY, USA,
2006. ACM.

