The Value of Visual Elements in Web Search
Marilyn Ostergren, Seung-yon Yu, Efthimis N. Efthimiadis
The Information School
University of Washington, Box 352840
Seattle, WA 98195-2840
{ostergrn, syyu, efthimis}@uw.edu
can be used to support the decision ‘should I follow this link?’
These surrogates, along with other information on the page may
also support the decision to reformulate the search query – either
because the results don’t seem relevant, or because they trigger
ideas that alter the searcher’s target or conceptualization of the
information need [4].

ABSTRACT
We used eye-tracking equipment to observe 36 participants as
they performed three search tasks using three graphicallyenhanced web search interfaces (Kartoo, SearchMe and Viewzi).
In this poster we describe findings of the study focusing on how
the presentation of SERP results influences how the user scans
and attends to the results, and the user satisfaction with these
search engines.

Our study investigates how searchers interact with graphical, nontextual search engine results page user interfaces (SERP UIs) to
reveal the potential value of these alternative display strategies.
We study whether the unique characteristics of these displays
facilitate the work of scanning the page for the clues that support
the decision to follow a link or reformulate a query.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Search process
H.5.2 [Information interfaces and presentation]: User
Interfaces. - Graphical user interfaces.

2. REVIEW OF RESEARCH

General Terms

Others have also used eye-tracking to gain an understanding of
what happens during search. A major finding of this work is that,
when results are presented as a ranked list, users direct most of
their attention to results near the top of the list [2,5]. This is true
even if the list is manipulated so that more relevant results appear
lower on the list [5], and even if the eye-tracking data shows that
the viewer looked at those more relevant results [2]. Cutrell &
Guan [1] found that this bias toward earlier results can also be
affected by the content of the surrogates – in this case, by the
length of the text snippet.

Design, Human Factors.

Keywords
Search Engine Results Page Display (SERP), Eye-tracking study,
Search Engine Evaluation, User Study

1. INTRODUCTION
The results of a web search are generally presented as a collection
of web-page surrogates. Each surrogate conveys information that

Figure 1: Screenshots of ViewZi, SearchMe, and KartOO

Figure 2: Hot spots for ViewZi, SearchMe, and KartOO
Some other observations revealed by eye-tracking that are
relevant to our work are that placement and proximity of image
search results affects a viewers gaze path [6], and that an
organized display with an explicit hierarchy reinforced with

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).

SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

867

scan sequentially through the entire result set using the slider
control that is located at the bottom of the screen, none of our
participants took advantage of this feature choosing instead to
analyze each carefully in sequence. The Viewzi display facilitates
scanning in a way that is similar to the typical ranked list. The
results are displayed from left to right and continue in rows from
top to bottom. The most attention is given to the surrogate in the
upper-left hand corner with correspondingly less attention to the
surrogates to the right and bottom. However we did find that this
strong preference for the surrogates near the beginning of the
sequence is less pronounced than that reported by Guan & Cutrell
with the typical ranked list display [2]. The question remains how
much of this scanning behavior was influenced by the
arrangement of the surrogates and how much was influenced by
the content of the surrogates. The fact that users viewed more
surrogates using the Kartoo display appears to be mostly because
the surrogates provide fewer textual cues as to the content of the
target website. The results of our questionnaires indicate that
Kartoo was the least popular interface while SearchMe, which
heavily favored the first site in the list and elicited very little
browsing, was the most popular. In terms of ease of interaction
on a scale of 1-9, where 1 is most difficult, 5 is average, and 9 is
least difficult, 30% found Kartoo most difficult (1-2), 70% found
SearchMe least difficult (7-9), and 42% found Viewzi average.

headings and indentations facilitates a more efficient visual search
[3].

3. METHODOLOGY
To gather evidence for how graphical qualities of a SERP support
or hinder a user, we collected and analyzed two sources of data: 1.
self-report (both audio recordings of verbalizations during search
and responses to a questionnaire), and 2. observation (cursor and
gaze behavior). We collected this data while users completed a
series of search tasks using three graphically-enhanced search
interfaces. The interfaces were Kartoo (kartoo.com), SearchMe
(searchme.com) and Viewzi (viewzi.com). We chose these three
because they display the results using graphical representation
rather than the typical text-based ranked list. They also have
enough similarities to each other to allow for meaningful
comparisons.

3.1 Participants
We recruited 36 participants, all undergraduate students at a
major research university. They were divided into two groups: 18
were trained to search the three SE, 18 were untrained.

3.2 Search Tasks
We chose search tasks which require different types of cognitive
processing and navigation to elicit a range of search behaviors.
Task 1 asked the user to find the schedule of events at a local
performance theater. Task 2 asked to find two sites where a
specific camera model could be purchased. Task 3 asked the user
to find two credible sites describing the side-effects of aspirin.

5. CONCLUDING REMARKS
The major insight from our initial analysis is that the visual, nonlinear qualities of these SERP displays strongly influence the user
interaction, in particular, the number and sequence in which the
surrogates are explored. Satisfaction with the SERP displays is
correlated more closely with the textual content of the surrogates.
Our more detailed analysis will look at what elements of the
surrogate were examined (e.g. the URL, the text snippet, the
screenshot) and compare these results with a similar data for a
standard text-based search result display.
Familiarity to SE and knowledge about the functionality of the SE
affected user satisfaction. Training how to search using the visual
search engines enhanced the user’s search effectiveness, e.g., less
number of query reformulations, more efficient search by using
search features, and better user satisfaction. When asked if they
intend to use the visual search engine again, more trained users
answered positively than non-trained users. The most popular
search engine that people want to use again was SearchMe (72%),
followed by Viewzi (36%), and then Kartoo (33%).

3.3 Data Collection
Data was collected using questionnaires, the think-aloud process,
eye-tracking, transaction logging, and participant observation.
We used the Tobii eye-tracking system and ClearView 2.7.1
software to record and analyze the eye-tracking data. After each
search, we asked the users to reflect upon how the interface
affected their searching. After the entire set of searches, we asked
them to compare the interfaces with each other.

4. DISCUSSION
Each of these three SERP interfaces uses an arrangement of page
surrogates which differs from the usual top-to-bottom linear
display. Viewzi (upper left in Figure ) uses a grid. SearchMe
(central image in Figure ) uses a horizontal display in which only
one surrogate (the central one) is clearly displayed at a time,
while the previous and subsequent surrogates are smaller and
displayed as if in a stack set at an angle to the central surrogate.
Kartoo (right in Figure ) spreads the surrogates across the page
organized by major topic area and resembles a map.
The three displays also differ in the content of each surrogate. All
three include a thumbnail image of the site though they vary
substantially in size (Figure ). All three include some text – a
partial URL and keywords in Kartoo, a slightly-abbreviated
Google-derived snippet in Viewzi, and a snippet plus access to the
full page (using a magnifying window) in SearchMe.
We can easily see differences in scanning behavior across the
three interfaces. This is evident in the heat-map images in Figure
which show the combined gaze data from 18 participants. Our
analysis indicates that the Kartoo display elicited the most
scanning. Participants generally spent time looking at all 10
surrogates before clicking to go to a page. The SearchMe Display
elicited careful analysis of individual surrogates, but inhibited
scanning beyond the first few results. Though it is possible to

6. REFERENCES
[1] E. Cutrell & Z. Guan. What are you looking for?: An eyetracking study of information usage in Web search. CHI '07.
ACM, New York, NY, (2007), 407-416.
[2] Guan, Z., & Cutrell, E. An eye tracking study of the effect of
target rank on Web search. In CHI 2007, ACM (2007).
[3] Hornof, A.J., & Halverson, T. Cognitive strategies and eye
movements for searching hierarchical computer displays. In
Proceedings of CHI 2003, ACM Press (2003), 249-256.
[4] Johnson, F C. User interactions with results summaries. In
Proceedings of the ACM SIGIR 2007 workshop on web
information seeking and interaction (2007), 131-134.
[5] Lorigo, L., et al. 2008. Eye tracking and online search:
Lessons learned and challenges ahead. J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci.
Technol. 59, 7 (May. 2008), 1041-1052.
[6] Tseng, Y.C., Howes, A. The Adaptation of Visual Search
Strategy to Expected Information Gain. CHI 2008, 1075-84.

868

