S-PLSA+: Adaptive Sentiment Analysis with Application to
Sales Performance Prediction
Yang Liu§,† , Xiaohui Yu†,§ , Xiangji Huang† , and Aijun An†
§

School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong University
Jinan, Shandong, China, 250101
†
York University, Toronto, ON, Canada, M3J 1P3

yliu@sdu.edu.cn,xhyu@yorku.ca,jhuang@yorku.ca,aan@cse.yorku.ca
ABSTRACT

To this end, we take a Bayesian approach, and propose an adaptive version of the S-PLSA model that is equipped with the incremental learning capability for continuously updating the model using newly observed reviews. The proposed model is motivated by
the principle of quasi-Bayesian (QB) estimation, which has found
successful applications in various domains such as adaptive speech
recognition and text retrieval [1]. We call the proposed model the
S-PLSA+ model, in which the parameters are estimated by maximizing an approximate posterior distribution. One salient feature
of our modeling is the judicious use of hyperparameters, which can
be recursively updated in order to obtain up-to-date posterior distribution and to estimate new model parameters. This modeling
approach makes it possible to efficiently update the model parameters in an incremental manner without the need to re-train the model
from scratch each time as new reviews become available.

Analyzing the large volume of online reviews would produce useful
knowledge that could be of economic values to vendors and other
interested parties. In particular, the sentiments expressed in the
online reviews have been shown to be strongly correlated with the
sales performance of products. In this paper, we present an adaptive
sentiment analysis model called S-PLSA+ , which aims to capture
the hidden sentiment factors in the reviews with the capability to
be incrementally updated as more data become available. We show
how S-PLSA+ can be applied to sales performance prediction using
an ARSA model developed in previous literature. A case study
is conducted in the movie domain, and results from preliminary
experiments confirm the effectiveness of the proposed model.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.4.0 [Information Systems Applications]: General

2.

General Terms

In the S-PLSA model [4], a review can be considered as being
generated under the influence of a number of hidden sentiment factors. The use of hidden factors provides the model the ability to
accommodate the intricate nature of sentiments, with each hidden
factor focusing on one specific aspect. What differentiates S-PLSA
from conventional PLSA is its use of a set of appraisal words [4]
as the basis for feature representation. The rationale is that those
appraisal words, such as “good" or “terrible", are more indicative
of the review’s sentiments than other words.
For a given set of N reviews D = {d1 , . . . , dN }, and the set
of M appraisal words W = {w1 , . . . , wM }, the S-PLSA model
dictates that the joint probability of observed pair (di , wj ) is genP
erated by P (di , wj ) = P (di ) K
k=1 P (wj |zk )P (zk |di ), where
zk ∈ Z = {z1 , . . . , zK } corresponds to the latent sentiment factor, and where we assume that di and wj are independent conditioned on the mixture of associated sentiment factor zk . The set of
parameters θ of this model consist of {P (wj |zk ), P (zk |di )}, the
maximum likelihood estimates of which can be obtained through
an expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm [4].

Algorithm, Experiment

Keywords
sentiment analysis, review mining, prediction

1.

INTRODUCTION

Online reviews present a wealth of information on products and
services, and if properly utilized, can provide vendors highly valuable intelligence to facilitate the improvement of their business. As
such, a growing number of recent studies have focused on the economic values of reviews, exploring the relationship between the
sales performance of products and their reviews [3, 2, 4]. Gruhl et
al. [3] show that the volume of relevant postings can help predict
the sales rank of books on Amazon, especially the spikes in sales
ranks. Ghose et al. [2] also demonstrate that subjectivity of reviews
can have an impact on sales performance.
Liu et al. [4] propose a probability model called Sentiment PLSA
(S-PLSA for short) based on the assumption that sentiment consists
of multiple hidden aspects. They develop a model called ARSA
(which stands for Auto-Regressive Sentiment-Aware) to quantitatively measure the relationship between sentiment aspects and reviews. Our experience with running ARSA on several online review datasets reveals that the model is highly sensitive to the sentiment factors, which are constantly changing over time as new reviews become available. It is therefore essential to allow the SPLSA model to adapt to newly available review data.

3.

S-PLSA

ADAPTIVE S-PLSA

The S-PLSA model can be trained in a batch manner on a collection of reviews, and then be applied to analyze others. In many
cases, however, the reviews are continuously becoming available,
with the sentiment factors constantly changing. We thus hope to
adapt the model to the newly obtained reviews, in order to make
it more suitable to the changing contexts. A naïve way to perform
the adaptation is to re-train the model from scratch using all data
available including the newly obtained data, which is clearly highly
inefficient. Here, we propose a model called S-PLSA+ , which performs incremental learning based on the principle of quasi-Bayesian

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

873

on S-PLSA+ . It reflects the sentiment “mass" that can be attributed
to factor zj . The ARSA model can be trained using linear least
squares regression. Note that the notion of time (t) in the ARSA
model is different from the epoch (n) in S-PLSA+ . For example,
sales prediction can be made for each day using ARSA, whereas
the model adaptation of S-PLSA+ can happen every other day.

(QB) estimation. The basic idea is to perform updating and downdating at the same time by (i) incrementally accumulating statistics
on the training data, and (ii) fading out the out-of-date data.
Let Dn be the set of reviews made available at epoch n (e.g.,
the reviews published on a certain day, but the time unit used can
be set to be finer or coarser based on the need), and denote by
χn = {D1 , . . . , Dn } the set of reviews obtained up to epoch n.
QB S-PLSA estimates at epoch n are determined by maximizing
the posterior probability using χn :
θ

(n)

n

n−1

= arg max P (θ|χ ) = arg max P (Dn |θ)P (θ|χ
θ

θ

5.

)

In order to allow closed-form recursive update of θ, we use the
closest tractable prior density g(θ|φ(n−1) ) with sufficient statistics
to approximate the posterior density P (θ|χn−1 ), where φn−1 is
evolved from review sets χn−1 . This leads to θ(n) ≈ arg maxθ
P (Dn |θ)g(θ|φ(n−1) ). Note that at epoch n, only the new reviews
Dn and the current statistics φ(n−1) are used to update the S-PLSA+
parameters, and the set of reviews Dn are discarded after new parameter values φ(n) are obtained, which results in significant savings in computational resources.
The particular choice of the prior g(θ|φ) in our model is the
Dirichlet density, which
can be expressed by


g(θ|φ) =

K
Y

M
Y


k=1

N
Y

αj,k −1

P (wj |zk )

j=1

βk,i −1 

P (zk |di )

i=1

where φ = {αj,k , βk,i } are the hyperparameters of the Dirichlet
distribution. Assuming for the moment that φ(n−1) is known, we
can show that θ(n) can be obtained through an EM algorithm [1].
A major benefit of S-PLSA+ lies in its ability to continuously
update the hyperparameters. We can show that the new hyperparameters are given by

Original
0.352

|Dn |
(n)

αj,k =

X

(n)

c(di

(n)

, wj

)P

(n)

(n)

(zk |di

(n)

, wj

(n−1)

) + αj,k

(1)

(n)

βk,i =

(n)

c(di

(n)

, wj

)P

(n)

(n)

(zk |di

(n)

, wj

(n−1)

) + βk,i

.

(2)

j=1

(n)

(n)

where the posterior P (n) (zk |di , wj ) is computed using Dn and
(n)
(n)
the current parameters θ(n) , and c(di , wj ) denotes the number
(n)

(n)

of (di , wj ) pairs.
To summarize, S-PLSA+ works as follows. In the startup phase,
initial estimates of the hyperparameters φ(0) are obtained. Then,
at each learning epoch n, (i) new estimates of the parameters θ(n)
are computed based on the newly available data Dn and hyperparameters obtained from epoch n − 1; and (ii) new estimates of the
hyperparameters φ(n) are obtained using (1) and (2). This way, the
model is continuously updated when new reviews (Dn ) become
available, and at the same time fades out historical data χn−1 , with
the information contained in χn−1 already captured by φ(n−1) .

4.

6.

APPLICATION TO SALES PREDICTION

yt =

i=1

ϕi yt−1 +

q X
R
X

Epoch 2
0.241

Epoch 3
0.247

Epoch 4
0.240

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

In this paper, we have presented an adaptive S-PLSA model that
is capable of incrementally updating its parameters and automatically downdating old information when new review data become
available. This model has been used in conjunction with the ARSA
model for predicting sales performance. Preliminary experimental results show that by allowing the model to be adaptive, we
can capture new sentiment factors arising from newly available reviews, which can greatly improve the prediction accuracy. For future work, we plan to study the performance of S-PLSA+ in other
information retrieval and data mining tasks.

The proposed S-PLSA+ model can be employed in a variety of
tasks, e.g., sentiment clustering, sentiment classification, etc. As a
sample application, we plug it into the ARSA model proposed in
[4], which is used to predict sales performance based on reviews
and past sales data. The original ARSA model uses S-PLSA as the
component for capturing sentiment information. With S-PLSA+ ,
the ARSA model can be formulated as follows:
p
X

Epoch 1
0.295

The accuracy improves as the model is getting updated in the first
two epochs, which demonstrates the benefits of having an incremental model to absorb new information; especially in our case,
S-PLSA+ allows the models to be adapted to the individual movies.
The accuracy stays stable from Epoch 2 through Epoch 4, indicating that no significant new information is available from Epoch 2
to Epoch 4.

i=1
M
X

EXPERIMENTS

Experiments were conducted on an IMDB dataset to evaluate
the effectiveness of the proposed approach by comparing the prediction accuracy of ARSA using S-PLSA+ and that of the original
ARSA. The dataset was obtained from the IMDB Website by collecting 28,353 reviews for 20 drama films released in the US from
May 1, 2006 to September 1, 2006, along with their daily gross
box office revenues. Half of the movies are used for batch training.
For the original ARSA, the trained model is then used to make predictions in the testing data consisting of the other half the movies.
For the proposal model, adaptation of the S-PLSA+ component is
performed for each movie in the testing set, in four epochs on four
different days v (v = 2, 4, 6, 8) using the review data available up
to day v. The up-to-date model at day v is then used for subsequent
prediction tasks.
We use the mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) to measure
P
the prediction accuracy: MAPE = T1 Ti=1 (|Predi −Truei |/Truei ),
where T is the number of instances in the testing set, and Predi and
Truei are the predicted value and the true value respectively. The
results on the accuracy of the original ARSA and that of the ARSA
using S-PLSA+ updated at Epochs 1-4 (v = 2, 4, 6, 8) respectively
are shown in the table below.

Acknowledgements
This work is supported by NSERC Discovery Grants, an Early Researcher Award of Ontario and an NSFC Grant (No. 60903108).

7.

REFERENCES

[1] Jen-Tzung Chien and Meng-Sung Wu. Adaptive bayesian latent semantic
analysis. IEEE TASLP, 16(1):198–207, 2008.
[2] Anindya Ghose and Panagiotis G. Ipeirotis. Designing novel review ranking
systems: predicting the usefulness and impact of reviews. In ICEC, pages
303–310, 2007.
[3] Daniel Gruhl, R. Guha, Ravi Kumar, Jasmine Novak, and Andrew Tomkins. The
predictive power of online chatter. In KDD ’05, pages 78–87, 2005.
[4] Yang Liu, Xiangji Huang, Aijun An, and Xiaohui Yu. ARSA: a sentiment-aware
model for predicting sales performance using blogs. In SIGIR, pages 607–614,
2007.

ρi,j ωt−i,j + t ,

i=1 j=1

where (i) yt denotes the sales figure at time t after proper preprocessing such as de-seasoning, (ii) p, q, and R are user-chosen
parameters, (iii) ϕi and ρi,j are coefficents
to be estimated using
P
training data, and (iv) ωt,j = |R1t | d∈Rt p(zj |d), where Rt is
the set of reviews available at time t and p(zj |d) is computed based

874

