Mining Adjacent Markets from a Large-scale Ads Video
Collection for Image Advertising
Guwen Feng†

Xin-Jing Wang, Lei Zhang, Wei-Ying Ma

Nanjing University
Nanjing, Jiangsu, P.R.China

Microsoft Research Asia
Beijing, P.R.China

linvondepp@gmail.com

{xjwang,leizhang,wyma}@microsoft.com

ABSTRACT

Retrieved And Expanded Frames

The research on image advertising is still in its infancy. Most
previous approaches suggest ads by directly matching an ad to a
query image, which lacks the power to identify ads from adjacent
market. In this paper, we tackle the problem by mining
knowledge on adjacent markets from ads videos with a novel
Multi-Modal Dirichlet Process Mixture Sets model, which is a
unified model of (video frames) clustering and (ads) ranking. Our
approach is not only capable of discovering relevant ads (e.g. car
ads for a query car image), but also suggesting ads from adjacent
markets (e.g. tyre ads). Experimental results show that our
proposed approach is fairly effective.

..
.
...
Ranking Results

Query
Advertise
Benz

Insurance

Tires

Figure 1. Key idea: the story frames (in red blocks) and ads
frames (cyan blocks) of video ads suggest adjacent markets.

Categories and Subject Descriptors

product/object (e.g. car).

I.5.4 [Pattern Recognition]: Applications – computer vision. G.3
[Probability and Statistics]: Nonparametric statistics.

In this paper we propose a solution of adjacent marketing for
image advertising based on a large-scale ads video collection. It is
motivated by the fact that generally a video ad contains two types
of frames – story frames and ads frames, as shown in Figure 1.
Story frames in general provide the main concepts (e.g. cars) that
are related to the corresponding ads (e.g. insurance, tires). They
imply certain human knowledge on the adjacent markets, e.g.
showing tire ads on car images. A novel Multi-Modal Dirichlet
Process Mixture Sets (MoM-DPM Sets) model is proposed as the
key technique behind.

General Terms
Algorithms, Performance.

Keywords
Image advertising, adjacent marketing, video retrieval.

1. INTRODUCTION
Though image has become an important media in the Web, how to
monetize web images is a seldom touched problem. Few research
works have been published in the literature. Among them, most of
the works suggest directly mapping an ad to an image [2]. They
suffer from the vocabulary impedance problem so that if a term
does not appear in both an image and an ad’ features, no
connections will be built between them. The approach of Wang et
al. [4] improves this by leveraging the ODP ontology to bridge the
vocabulary gap, but it is still limited by the available texts.

2. SYSTEM OVERVIEW
Figure 2 shows the system overview. In the offline stage, we
extract video keyframes and perform auto-tagging on them. The
online stage contains three steps: 1) multimodal search on
keyframes of ads videos given a query image (or query images).
Both visual and textual similarities are taken into consideration.
The texts come from three resources: image auto-tagging, OCR
and surrounding texts; 2) search result expansion. Since the search
step tends to find video frames of similar content, to incorporate
the adjacent information between objects, we expand the retrieved
frames with the rest frames in corresponding videos. For example,
given the pizza image in Figure 2, the retrieved frames are
generally about food, but by expanding them with the rest frames
from the same ads videos, we are able to retrieve those soft drink
and restaurant video frames which suggest the adjacent markets;
and 3) ads clustering and ranking. The disadvantage brought by
frame expansion is that the search results become noisy and with
scattered topics. We propose the MoM-DPM Sets model to
automatically learn the key topics from the expanded search
results, and rank an ads database with the learnt topics. The top-

Adjacent marketing means to develop additional items which
compliment a customer’s needs in some manner, e.g. suggest
insurance when one buys a car. The insurance package thus makes
up of qualified adjacent markets of cars. A key challenge is to
discover the potential adjacent market (e.g. insurance) of a certain

† This work was performed in Microsoft Research Asia.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

893

Query Image

Suggested Ads

0.8

Pizza

Pepsi

Pizza

Average Precision

Advertise
Restaurant

1. Search
6. Sorting Approach
Annotate Using Arista
Visutal Features Detection
Using ColorDescriptor

Large-Scale
Video Frames DB

Ads DB

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

2. Cosine Measurement

1

5. Ranking
MoM-DPM
Sets

3

5

7

Our Approach

Argo [4]

|
...

...

∑

max

Figure 2. System Overview.

∑

|

ranked ads will be output. Therefore we find ads of Pepsi Cola
and restaurants for the pizza image.

where

3. THE MoM-DPM SETS MODAL

4. EXPERIMENTS

,

∑

∑

|
| ,
if

∑

|

for some
∑

|
if

;

|

|

for all

.

,…,

,
,

(2)

,
defines the latent topic space.

There are big gaps between our methods and the baselines in top 3
results, while the gap narrows down from top 5 to top 20. This
may due to the limited size of our ads DB. Considering that
generally a publisher such as Google shows less than five targeted
ads, our method suggests a promising research direction for
adjacent marketing.

,

|

,

,
|

Figure 3 illustrates the average precision at top 20 ads of our
approach compared with those of the baselines Argo [4] and direct
match [2]. It can be seen that our approach consistently
outperforms the baselines. The gap between the blue curve and
the green one indicates that our approach is able to identify the
relevant ads from potential adjacent market, which have little
overlap with the query image in both visual and textual features.
And the gap between the red curve and the green one indicates
that Argo [4] also tackles the adjacent marketing problem to a
certain extent but it is not effective enough.

be the th latent topic and , be the visual and textual
Let
,
denote the
features of a query image respectively. Let ,
concentration parameter and base distributions of visual and
textual features respectively. Let ,
be model parameters and
,
be the visual and textual features of the observed video
frames labeled by the topic respectively. The general form of is
MoM-DPM Sets is given in Eq(1).
,

..

..

We crawled about 32k videos from Youtube.com initiated by 30
popular concepts for advertising. In total 327,889 key frames were
extracted, which make up of the ads videos collection for frame
search. We randomly selected 450 ads as a separate ads DB for
the ranking purpose. 100 Flickr images were used as queries.

The MoM-DPM Sets model addresses four challenges: 1)
discover the latent topics shared among the frames, 2)
automatically determine the number of topics, 3) leverage both the
visual and textual features to ensure a better performance of topic
discovery, and 4) unify the approaches of topic mining and ads
ranking.

, ,

DM [2]

20

top N

Figure 3. Average precision performance @ top N.

4. Clustering

,

15

Clusters

Expanded Video Frames 3. Expand

|

10

(1)

5. CONCLUSION

and
are the observed video frames corresponding to
where
topic . is the normalization factor. is the number of observed
video frames and
, is the number of observed video frames
(except the th) which belong to topic . We use Gibbs sampling
to solve the model, which generally converges in 30 iterations.

Web image is an uncovered gold mine. Our method is the first
work to tackle the adjacent marketing problem for image
advertising. It leverages the human intelligence embedded in
video ads to build the connections among ads objects based on a
novel Multi-Modal Dirichlet Process Mixture Sets model.

MoM-DPM Sets has two key features which make it different
from previous multimodal DP Mixture processes [3]. Firstly,
rather than to learn an optimal parameter set of , , it intends
to figure out the membership of each video frame given the
observed video frames
, . In our approach, , ,
and
and
are learnt from the clustering step), while
are known (
the model parameters are going to be integrated out analytically.
Such a set-based reasoning strategy [1] is more powerful in
discovering analogical objects, e.g. given a frame set of Pepsi-cola
and Coca-cola, this model is able to discover soda because they
share the same concept of soft drinks. Secondly, since the model
does not rely on certain parameter set, the clustering (topic
mining) step and ranking step shares the same model formulation.
The ranking process is as Eq.(2).

6. REFERENCES
[1] Z. Ghahramani, and K. A. Heller. Bayesian Sets. Neural
Information Processing Systems (NIPS). 2005.
[2] T. Mei, X.-S. Hua, and S.-P. Li. Contextual In-Image
Advertising. 2008.
[3] A. Velivelli, and T.S. Huang. Automatic Video Annotation
Using Multimodal Dirichlet Process Mixture Model. ICNSC
2008.
[4] X.-J. Wang, M. Yu, et al. Argo: Intelligent Advertising by
Mining a User's Interest from His Photo Collections, in
conjunction with SIGKDD (ADKDD), Paris, 2009.

894

