Learning the Click-Through Rate for Rare/New Ads from
Similar Ads
Kushal Dave

Vasudeva Varma

Language Technologies Research Centre
International Institute of Information Technology
Hyderabad, India

Language Technologies Research Centre
International Institute of Information Technology
Hyderabad, India

kushal.dave@research.iiit.ac.in

vv@iiit.ac.in

ABSTRACT

is calculated form past click logs. For new/rare ads, we do
not have any/sufficient past click data. Hence CTR for such
ads need to be predicted so that they can be ranked along
with other frequent ads. Richardson et. al. [5] predict the
CTR based on ad text, ad quality etc. Fain et. al. [4] predict the CTR based on term clusters. We propose similarity
features derived from click logs and advertisers hierarchy to
accurately predict the CTR for new ads.

Ads on the search engine (SE) are generally ranked based on
their Click-through rates (CTR). Hence, accurately predicting the CTR of an ad is of paramount importance for maximizing the SE’s revenue. We present a model that inherits
the click information of rare/new ads from other semantically related ads. The semantic features are derived from
the query ad click-through graphs and advertisers account
information. We show that the model learned using these
features give a very good prediction for the CTR values.

2.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
I.2.6 [Computing Methodologies]: Artificial Intelligence—
Learning; I.6.5 [Computing Methodologies]: Simulation
and Modeling—model development; H.3.3 [Information Systems]: Information Storage and Retrieval

General Terms
Algorithms, Economics, Experimentation.

Keywords
Sponsored Search, Click-Through Rate Prediction, Ranking

1.

INTRODUCTION

3.

Sponsored search can be seen as an interaction between
three parties - SE, User and the Advertiser. The user issues
a query to a SE related to the topic on which he/she seeks
information. Advertisers and SEs try to exploit the immediate interest of user in the topic by displaying ads relevant to
the query topic. Advertisers bid on certain keywords known
as bid terms and their ads may get displayed based on the
match between bid term and the user query. SEs try to rank
the ads in a way that maximizes its revenue.
Search engines typically rank ads based on the expected
revenue (ad (Rev)). Expected revenue from an ad is a function of both bid and relevance: ad (Rev) = Bid∗Relevancead .
The relevace of an ad is measured using its CTR. The CTR
of an ad for a query is the no. of clicks normalized by no.
of impressions for that query. CTR of an ad is a function of
both ad and the query, i.e. an ad can have a different CTR
for different queries. The CTR value for an ad-query pair

DATASET

The dataset used in our experiments comprised 12 days
search log from Yahoo! search engine’s US market. After
removing redundant fields, each record in the dataset contained following fields: 1.Query 2.Term Id 3. Creative ID
4.Adgroup ID 5.Campaign ID 6.Account ID 8.CTR. Fields
2-6 point to a unique ad. Creative id points to the ad text.
An ad text comprises bid term, title, abstract & display
URL. The CTR values are normalized by removing the position & presentation bias. After some preprocessing, we got
1,447,543 unique query-ad pairs from the click through logs.
It contained 1,97,080 unique queries and 9,43,431 unique
ads. We randomly divide this dataset into 65-25-10 ratio for
training, testing and validation respectively. We use Gradient boosted decision trees (GBDT) as a regression model [3].
Using validation set, the number of trees and no. of nodes
parameters of GBDT were set to 600 and 150 respectively.

FEATURES

Features from Query-ad click graph: These features
are based on the semantic relations of the queries and ads
with other similar queries and ads. Regelson [4] have shown
that similar ads (bid terms in their case) follow similar CTR
distribution. The idea here is to learn the CTR values of
query-ad pair from semantically similar queries and ads.
We derive the semantic similarity from the query ad clickthrough graph. The click graph is built from 12 days query
log (same period from which we generated our dataset).
Queries are represented as vectors and these query vectors
are compared to find similarity amongst the queries. A
query q is represented as a vector of transition probability
from q to all the ads in the graph. Edges are weighted using click frequency-inverse query frequency (CF-IQF) model:
cf iqf (qi , aj ) = cij ∗ iqf (aj ).
The transition probability from a query to an ad, P (aj |qi ) =
cf iqf (qi , aj )/cf iqf (qi ). Each query is represented as q =
(P (a1 |qi ), P (a2 |qi ), · · · , P (an |qi )). The similarity between
two queries qi and qj is the cosine similarity between the
q~i ∗ q~j
. This
two query vectors. Sim(qi , qj ) = Cosine
k qi k · k qj k

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

897

Table 1: Improvement for various features (p-value ≤ 0.01)
Feature
Baseline
Sim-Q
Sim-A
Sim-QA
Term
Creative
Adgroup

RMSE
(1e-3)
7.20
5.86
6.31
5.68
6.24
6.51
5.87

KL Diver-gence (1e-1)
1.72
1.42
1.53
1.38
1.45
1.50
1.35

%
Improvement
18.61%
12.36%
21.11%
13.34%
9.6%
18.48%

Feature
Campaign
Account
AdH
SimQA+Camp
QADL
SimQA+Camp
+QADL

similarity is used to predict the CTR for new query-ad pair
by retrieving top k queries similar to q’ and calculating the
weighted average of the CTR values for all the ads over query
q’ as in [1]. Using query similarity,the CTR is estimated as:
X
CT R(qk ) ∗ Sim(qi , qk )
QCT R(ai ) =

Sim(qi , qk )

k

The similarity between ads is also calculated in a similar
fashion, with each ad being represented by the transition
probability from ad to query P (qj |ai ) and similarity between
two ads is reffered as Sim(ai , ak ). Using ad similarity, The
CTR of is estimated as X
follows:
CT R(ak ) ∗ Sim(ai , ak )
ACT R(ai ) =

k

X

KL Diver-gence (1e-1)
1.32
1.39
1.46
1.24
1.56

%
Improvement
21.25%
17.50%
13.9%
26.67%
9.72%

5.14

1.21

28.61%

features. We call these features as AdH features. Detailed
explanation of all the features is available in [2].
Features from Query-ad lexical match: In an attempt to capture how relevant an ad is to the query, we
compute the lexical overlap between the query and these ad
units. We compute various text matching features such as
cosine similarity, word overlap, character overlap, and string
edit distance for each combination of unigrams and bi-grams.
We refer to this category of features as QADL. For all the set
of features we also consider log of each feature as a feature.
In all we have 50 features.
As shown in Table 1, Sim-Q & Sim-A give good improvements and when combined (Sim-QA) give an improvement
of 21.11%. In the AdH category, Campaign (Camp) gave the
best result and when Sim-QA was clubbed with Camp the
improvement over baseline reached 26.67%. Finally, lexical
feature did not yeild much improvement alone, but (SimQA+Camp+QADL) give the best performance with a good
28.61% improvement over the baseline. All these improvements are staistically significant at 99% significance level.
When all the features were ranked according to the feature
importance [3]. Features like Campaign, ACTR, log(ACTR),
No. of ads in campaign were amongst the top few.

k

X

RMSE
(1e-3)
5.67
5.94
6.20
5.28
6.50

Sim(ai , ak )

k

Along with QCTR/ACTR We also consider the number of
similar queries/ads retrieved (Nq /Na ). The Query and ad
similarity featuers are called Sim-Q & Sim-A.
Figure 1: A typical Ad hierarchy

4.

CONCLUSIONS

We have proposed an approach to predict the CTR for
new ads based on the similarity with other ads/queries. The
similarity of ads is derived from sources like query ad clickthrough graph and advertisement hierarchies maintained by
the ad engine. The model gives good prediction on the CTR
values of new ads. Analysis of the feature’s contribution
shows that the features derived from the ad hierarchy and
from the click-through graphs contribute the most to the
model followed by some of the word overlap features.

5.

Features from Ad Hierarchy: Advertisements on an
ad engine are typically maintained in some kind of a hierarchy. One such hierarchy is shown in Fig. 1. There are
numerous reasons for maintaining ads in a hierarchy: (1)Advertiser’s business may span various business units (BU).
Ads from the same advertiser but from different BUs are
maintained in different accounts. (2)For each BU, the advertisers can have ads on a range of products. Advertisements from the same account on similar products fall under
the same Campaign. (3)Adgroups do further granular classification of ads. (4) Finally, an ad comprises a bid term
and ad text (creative). Combination of these two makes an
ad. We aggregate ads at each level viz. Term, Creative, Adgroup, Campaign and Account, compute the average within
each group and use them as features in our model. In addition, number of featuers in each group are also taken as

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We are grateful to Yahoo! labs Bangalore for granting
access to the ad click-through logs.

6.

REFERENCES

[1] T. Anastasakos, D. Hillard, S. Kshetramade, and H. Raghavan.
A collaborative filtering approach to ad recommendation using
the query-ad click graph. In CIKM ’09, pages 1927–1930, 2009.
[2] K. Dave and V. Varma. Predicting the click-through rate for
rare/new ads. Technical report IIIT/TR/2010/15, IIIT-H,
2010.
[3] J. H. Friedman. Stochastic gradient boosting. Comput. Stat.
Data Anal., 38(4):367–378, 2002.
[4] M. Regelson and D. C. Fain. Predicting click-through rate
using keyword clusters. In Electronic Commerce (EC). ACM,
2006.
[5] M. Richardson, E. Dominowska, and R. Ragno. Predicting
clicks: estimating the click-through rate for new ads. In WWW
’07, pages 521–530, 2007.

898

