A Survival Modeling Approach to Biomedical Search
Result Diversification
Xiaoshi Yin1,2 , Jimmy Xiangji Huang 2 , Xiaofeng Zhou 2 , Zhoujun Li 1

1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Beihang University, Beijing, China.
2
School of Information Technology, York University, Toronto, Canada.

xiaoshiyin@cse.buaa.edu.cn; jhuang@yorku.ca; lizj@buaa.edu.cn
ABSTRACT

level performance through their passage level results, instead
of working on the aspect level retrieval directly [3, 6].
In this paper, we ﬁrst propose a survival modeling approach to measuring the novel information provided by an
aspect with respect to its occurrences. Then, the relevance
and novelty of a retrieved document are combined at the
aspect level. Evaluation results show that the proposed approach is eﬀective in biomedical search result diversiﬁcation.

In this paper, we propose a probabilistic survival model derived from the survival analysis theory for measuring aspect novelty. The retrieved documents’ query-relevance and
novelty are combined at the aspect level for re-ranking. Experiments conducted on the TREC 2006 and 2007 Genomics
collections demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of the proposed approach in promoting ranking diversity for biomedical information retrieval.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.3.3 [Information Storage & Retrieval]: Information Search & Retrieval
General Terms: Performance, Experimentation
Keywords: Survival Modeling, Diversity, Biomedical IR

2.

SURVIVAL MODELING AND ANALYSIS
FOR MEASURING NOVELTY

Survival analysis is a statistical methodology used for modeling and evaluating survival data, also called time-to-event
data, where one is interested in the occurrence of events [2].
Survival time refers to a variable which measures the time
from a particular starting time to a particular endpoint of
interest. Events are usually referred as birth, death and failure that happen to an individual in the context of study. For
example, in clinical trial, one may interested in the number
of days that patient can survive in the study of the eﬀectiveness of a new treatment for a disease. Formally, the survival
function is deﬁned as:

1. INTRODUCTION
In the biomedical domain, the desired information of a
question (query) asked by biologists usually is a list of a
certain type of entities covering diﬀerent aspects that are
related to the question [6], such as genes, proteins, diseases,
mutations, etc. Hence it is important for a biomedical information retrieval (IR) system to provide comprehensive
and diverse answers to fulﬁll biologists’ information needs.
In the TREC 2006 and 2007 Genomics tracks, the “aspect
retrieval” was investigated. Its purpose was to study how a
biomedical IR system can support a user gather information
about the diﬀerent aspects of a topic. Aspects of a retrieved
passage could be a list of named entities or MeSH terms,
representing answers that cover diﬀerent portions of a full
answer to the query. Aspect Mean Average Precision (Aspect MAP) was deﬁned in the Genomics tracks to capture
similarities and diﬀerences among retrieved passages. It is a
measurement for diversity of the IR ranked list [5].
The Genomics aspect retrieval was ﬁrstly proposed in the
TREC 2006 Genomics track and further investigated in the
2007 Genomics track. However, to the best of our knowledge, there is not too much previous work conducted on
the Genomics aspect retrieval for promoting diversity in
the ranked list. University of Wisconsin re-ranked the retrieved passages using a clustering-based approach named
GRASSHOPPER to promote ranking diversity [4]. Unfortunately, for the Genomics aspect retrieval, this re-ranking
method hurt their system’s performance and decreased the
Aspect MAP of the original results [4]. Later in the TREC
2007 Genomics track, most teams tried to obtain the aspect

S(t) = P r(surviving longer than time t)
= P r(T > t)

(1)

where t is a speciﬁc time, T is a random variable denoting
the time of death, and “Pr” stands for probability. That is,
the survival function gives the probability that the time of
death is later than a speciﬁed time t. The survival function
must be non-increasing: S(u) ≤ S(t) if u > t. Usually
one assumes S(0) = 1, that is, at the start of the study,
the probability of surviving past time zero is one. The survival function is also assumed to approach zero as t increases
without bound [2].
In the context of information retrieval, aspects covered by
a document can be considered as treatments, a document
can be considered as a patient in the clinical trial case. The
number of times that an aspect has been observed can be
considered as the survival time. The new information that
can be provided by an aspect corresponds to the eﬀectiveness of a treatment. One can expect that, in a ranked list,
as the number of times that an aspect has been observed
increases, the new information that this aspect can provide
to a document decreases. For example, in a ranked document list, when aspect “stroke treatment” is observed in the
jth document at the ﬁrst time, the information provided by
this aspect should be counted as completely new. We presume that “stroke treatment” in the jth document covers the

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

901

Aspect mean average precision (MAP), since our objective
is to promote diversity in the IR ranked list.
Evaluation results of using the proposed approach for document re-ranking are shown in Table 1. The values in the
parentheses are the relative rates of improvement over the
original results. As we can see, our approach achieves promising and consistent performance improvements over all baseline runs. Performance improvements can be observed on
both levels of evaluation measures. It is worth mentioning that our approach can further improve the best result
(NLMinter) reported in the TREC 2007 Genomics track by
achieving 18.9% improvement on Aspect MAP and 11% improvement on Passage2 MAP.

topic of “medications taken by mouth for long-term stroke
treatment”. Then, when aspect “stroke treatment” is observed again in the kth (k > j) document of the ranked list,
it may provide new information about “injection for shortterm stroke treatment”, but it is also possible that it only
provides redundant information about “medications taken
by mouth for long-term stroke treatment”. As we can see,
this situation satisﬁes the properties of the survival function
described above.
We assume that the occurrences of an aspect follow Poisson distribution. Then, the survival model derived from
Equation 1 can be formally written as:
−λ

Saj (x) = P r(X > x) = 1 − e

x

λi
i!
i=0

(2)

on
MAP
NLMinter
SvvModel

where λ is the rate parameter of Poisson distribution. The
value of Saj (x) states the probability of obtaining new information from aspect aj (j = 1, 2, ..., n; where n is the number
of observed aspects) after it has been observed x times. Note
that in this paper, the aspects covered by a retrieved document are presented by concepts detected from Wikipedia [9].

3. COMBINING NOVELTY AND RELEVANCE
For retrieved documents, the document rankings should
depend on which documents the user has already seen. Suppose that we have ranked top i − 1 documents, and now we
need to decide which document should be ranked at the ith
position in the ranking list. The document that can deliver
the most new and relevant aspects should be considered as
the ith document in the ranking list. Assume that aspect
novelty and aspect query-relevance are independent of each
other. Then given previous ranked i − 1 documents, we rank
the ith document using the following scoring function:

Table 1:

i

P (N ew|aj )P (aj |Rel)

(3)

aj ∈Ad

i

where aj is an aspect detected from document di , which
follows Poisson distribution with an estimated rate parameter. P (N ew and Rel|aj ) denotes the probability that aj is
query-relevant and can provide new information as well.
P (N ew|aj ) in Equation 3 states the probability of obtaining new information from aspect aj , which can be calculated using the survival models proposed in Section 2.
P (N ew|aj ) = 1 when i = 1. Since we do not usually
have relevance information, P (aj |Rel) is unavailable. One
possible solution, as introduced in [7], is to consider that
the best bet is to relate the probability of aspect aj to
the conditional probability of observing aj given the query:
P (aj |Rel) ≈ P (aj |Q). P (aj |Q) can be calculated by the
two-stage model presented in [9].

4.

Okapi06b
SvvModel
Okapi06c
SvvModel

2006’s topics
Aspect
Passage2
0.2176
0.0450
0.2379
0.0472
(+9.3%)
(+4.9%)
0.3147
0.0968
0.3236
0.1009
(+2.8%)
(+4.2%)
0.2596
0.0601
0.2697
0.0624
(+3.9%)
(+3.8%)

Re-ranking Performance on Genomics topics

In this paper, we propose a survival modeling approach
to promoting ranking diversity for biomedical information
retrieval. The probabilistic survival model derived from the
survival analysis theory measures the probability that novel
information can be provided by an aspect with respect to its
occurrences. Experimental results show that the proposed
survival model can successfully capture the novel information delivered by aspects and achieve signiﬁcant improvements on ranking diversity. We also show that combining
the novelty and the relevance of a retrieved document at the
aspect level is an eﬀective way of promoting diversity of the
ranked list, while keeping the relevance of retrieved documents. The proposed approach not only achieves promising
performance improvements on the diversity based evaluation measure, but also on the relevance based evaluation
measure.

aj ∈Ad



on
MAP
Okapi06a
SvvModel

5. CONCLUSIONS

score(di ; d1 , ..., di−1 ) = P (N ew and Rel|di )

=
P (N ew and Rel|aj )P (aj )
∝

2007’s topics
Aspect
Passage2
0.2631
0.1148
0.3117
0.1270
(+18.5%)
(+10.6%)
MuMshFd
0.2068
0.0895
SvvModel
0.2432
0.0926
(+17.6%)
(+3.5%)
Okapi07
0.1428
0.0641
SvvModel
0.1660
0.0669
(+16.2%)
(+4.4%)

Acknowledgements
This work is supported by NSERC Discovery Grant and an
Early Researher Award of Ontario.

6.

REFERENCES

[1] M. Beaulieu, M. Gatford, X. Huang, S. Robertson, S. Walker,
and P. William. Okapi at TREC-5. In Proc. of TREC-5, 1997.
[2] D. Cox and D. Oakes. Analysis of Survival Data. Chapman Hall.
[3] D. Demner-Fushman and et. al. Combining resources to find
answers to biomedical questions. In Proc. of TREC-16, 2007.
[4] A. B. Goldberg and et. al. Ranking biomedical passages for
relevance and diversity: University of Wisconsin, Madison at
TREC Genomics 2006. In Proc. of TREC-15, 2006.
[5] W. Hersh, A. Cohen, P. Roberts, and H. Rekapalli. TREC 2006
Genomics track overview. In Proc. of TREC-15, 2006.
[6] W. Hersh, A. Cohen, L. Ruslen, and P. Roberts. TREC 2007
Genomics track overview. In Proc. of TREC-16, 2007.
[7] V. Lavrenko and W. B. Croft. Relevance based language models.
In Proceeding of the 24th ACM SIGIR.
[8] N. Stokes and et. al. Entity-based relevance feedback for
genomic list answer retrieval. In Proc. of TREC-16, 2007.
[9] X. Yin, X. Huang, and Z. Li. Promoting ranking diversity for
biomedical information retrieval using wikipedia. In Proc. of the
32nd ECIR, 2010.

EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

We conduct a series of experiments to evaluate the eﬀectiveness of the proposed model on the TREC 2006 and 2007
Genomics collections. For the 2007’s topics, three baseline
runs are used, which are NLMinter [3], MuMshFd [8] and
an Okapi run [1]. NLMinter and MuMshFd were two of the
most competitive IR runs submitted to the TREC 2007 Genomics track. For 2006’s topics, we test our approach on
three Okapi runs. In this paper, we mainly focus on the

902

