Introduction to Probabilistic Models in IR
Victor P. Lavrenko
University of Edinburgh, School of Informatics, Edinburgh, U.K., v.lavrenko@gmail.com

Abstract:

ACM Categories & Descriptors:

Most of today's state-of-the-art retrieval models, including BM25
and language modeling, are grounded in probabilistic principles.
Having a working understanding of these principles can help
researchers understand existing retrieval models better and also
provide industrial practitioners with an understanding of how such
models can be applied to real world problems.

H.3.3 Information Search and Retrieval; Retrieval Models

This half-day tutorial will cover the fundamentals of two dominant
probabilistic frameworks for Information Retrieval: the classical
probabilistic model and the language modeling approach. The
elements of the classical framework will include the probability
ranking principle, the binary independence model, the 2-Poisson
model, and the widely used BM25 model. Within language
modeling framework, we will discuss various distributional
assumptions and smoothing techniques. Special attention will be
devoted to the event spaces and independence assumptions
underlying each approach. The tutorial will outline several
techniques for modeling term dependence and addressing
vocabulary mismatch. We will also survey applications of
probabilistic models in the domains of cross-language and
multimedia retrieval. The tutorial will conclude by suggesting a
set of open problems in probabilistic models of IR.

Probability Ranking Principle, Language Modeling, Estimation,
Term Dependence, Cross-language Retrieval

General Terms:
Algorithms, Experimentation, Theory

Keywords:

Bios
Victor Lavrenko is a Lecturer in Informatics at the University of
Edinburgh. He received his Ph.D. in Computer Science from the
University of Massachusetts Amherst in 2004, and worked as a
language technology consultant for the Credit Suisse Group prior
to his appointment at Edinburgh. Victor presented tutorials on
language modeling and probabilistic approaches to IR at SIGIR
2003 and SIGIR 2009. He has published research papers in and
has reviewed for the SIGIR, CIKM, NAACL/HLT, KDD and
NIPS conferences. Victor's research interests include formal
models for searching text in multiple languages, annotating and
retrieving images, and detecting and tracking novel events in the
news. More information: http://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/vlavrenk

Attendees should have a basic familiarity with probability and
statistics. A brief refresher of basic concepts, including random
variables, event spaces, conditional probabilities, and
independence will be given at the beginning of the tutorial. In
addition to slides, some hands on exercises and examples will be
used throughout the tutorial.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

905

