Multimedia Information Retrieval
Stefan Rüger
Knowledge Media Institute
The Open University
Milton Keynes MK7 6AA, UK
s.rueger@open.ac.uk
that he was a Reader in Multimedia and Information Systems at
the Department of Computing, Imperial College London, where
he also held an EPSRC Advanced Research Fellowship (1999–
2004). Stefan is a theoretical physicist by training (FU Berlin)
and received his PhD in Computing in 1996 from TU Berlin for
his work on artificial intelligence and, in particular, the theory
of neural networks. Since then he has made a continuous
journey from theory to its applications in multimedia retrieval.
In 2009 he was awarded a Honorary Professorship (until 2014)
at the University of Waikato for his work with the Greenstone
Digital Library group. During his academic career he and his
team have authored over 100 scientific publications in the area
of multimedia information retrieval.

Abstract:
This tutorial is concerned with creating the best possible
multimedia search experience. The intriguing bit here is that the
query itself can be a multimedia excerpt: For example, when you
walk around in an unknown place and stumble across an
interesting landmark, would it not be great if you could just take a
picture with your mobile phone and send it to a service that finds a
similar picture in a database and tells you more about the building
– and about its significance for that matter?
The ideas for this type of search have been around for a decade,
but this tutorial will look at recent successes and take stock of the
state-of-the-art. It examines the full matrix of a variety of query
modes versus document types. How do you retrieve a music piece
by humming? What if you want to find news video clips on forest
fires using a still image? The tutorial discusses underlying
techniques and common approaches to facilitate multimedia
search engines: metadata driven search; piggy-back text search
where automated processes create text surrogates for multimedia;
automated image annotation; content-based search. The latter is
studied in more depth looking at features and distances, and how
to effectively combine them for efficient retrieval, to a point where
the participants have the ingredients and recipe in their hands for
building their own visual search engines.
Supporting users in their resource discovery mission when hunting
for multimedia material is not a technological indexing problem
alone. We will briefly look at interactive ways of engaging with
repositories through browsing and relevance feedback, roping in
geographical context, and providing visual summaries for videos.
The tutorial emphasises state-of-the-art research in the area of
multimedia information retrieval, which gives an indication of the
research and development trends and, thereby, a glimpse of the
future world.

Community Service:
Stefan chairs the – originally EPSRC funded – research network
on Multimedia Knowledge Management that comprises eight
UK universities. As general (co-)chair he organised ECIR 2006,
ECIR 2010 and ICTIR 2009. He was the programme chair of
IRFC 2010 and is currently programme co-chair of WI 2010 and
SAMT 2010. He was associate editor for MVA for 5 years,
currently acts as associate editor for TOIS and has been
reviewing for 25 other Computing journals, 50 international
conferences and 11 research funders including the Commission
of the European Communities and the European Research
Council. Stefan is a Fellow of the Higher Education Academy in
the UK; a member of the EPSRC College, ACM and BCS; and
treasurer of the BCS Information Retrieval Specialist Group.
Stefan also serves as a London Technology Network Business
Fellow for the Centre for Research in Computing at The Open
University. For further information and publications see
http://people.kmi.open.ac.uk/stefan.

Teaching:

ACM Categories & Descriptors:

Stefan
has been teaching since 1994 and obtained a
postgraduate qualification “Certificate of Advanced Studies in
Learning and Teaching” in 2002 following a formal one-year
part-time postgraduate study at Imperial College London. He
taught undergraduate courses and MSc courses to university
students, and compact courses to business consultants, who
participated in a part-time MSc programme “Computing in
Industry” while continuing to work. Stefan's teaching and
tutorial style is unconventional in the sense that he delivers a
fully worked out script [1] with his slides and loosens up
lectures with discussion points and exercises for which he gets
the class to actively participate.

H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Retrieval models;
Search process. H.3.1 [Content Analysis and Indexing]:
Indexing methods

General Terms:
Algorithms, Design, Experimentation

Keywords:
Multimedia information retrieval, automated image annotation,
browsing and relevance feedback, content-based search, metadata
driven search, piggy-back text search

Short Biography:

Reference:

Stefan Rüger joined The Open University's Knowledge Media
Institute in 2006 to take up a chair in Knowledge Media. Before

[1] Stefan Rüger (2010). Multimedia information retrieval.
Synthesis Lectures on Information Concepts, Retrieval and
Services.
Morgan
&
Claypool
Publishers.
DOI:
10.2200/S00244ED1V01Y200912ICR010

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

906

