Web Retrieval: The Role of Users
Ricardo Baeza-Yates
Yahoo! Research, Barcelona, Spainrbaeza@acm.org

Yoelle Maarek
Yahoo! Research, Haifa, Israel, yoelle@ymail.com
The goal of this tutorial is to teach the key principles and
technologies behind the activities and challenges briefly outlined
above, bring new understanding and insights to the attendees, and
hopefully foster future research.

Abstract:
Web retrieval methods have evolved through three major steps in the
last decade or so. They started from standard document-centric IR in
the early days of the Web, then made a major step forward by
leveraging the structure of the Web, using link analysis techniques in
both crawling and ranking challenges. A more recent, no less
important but maybe more discrete step forward, has been to enter the
user in this equation in two ways: (1) implicitly, through the analysis
of usage data captured by query logs, and session and click
information in general, the goal being to improve ranking as well as
to measure user's happiness and engagement; (2) explicitly, by
offering novel interactive features; the goal here being to better
answer users' needs. In this tutorial, we will cover the user-related
challenges associated with the implicit and explicit role of users in
Web retrieval. We will review and discuss challenges associated with
two types of activities, namely:
•

Usage data analysis and metrics - It is critical to monitor how
users interact with Web retrieval systems, as this implicit
relevant feedback aggregated at a large scale can approximate
quite accurately the level of success of a given feature. Here
we have to consider not only clicks statistics but also the time
spent in a page, the number of actions per session, etc.

•

User interaction - Given the intrinsic problems posed by the
Web, the key challenge for the user is to conceive a good query,
one that leads to a manageable and relevant answer. The
retrieval system must complete search requests fast and give
back relevant results, even for poorly formulated queries. Web
retrieval engines thus interact with the user at two key stages,
each associated with its own challenges: (1) Expressing a query:
Human beings have needs or tasks to accomplish, which are
frequently not easy to express as “queries”. Queries are just a
reflection of human needs and are thus, by definition,
imperfect. The issue here is for the engine both to assist the user
in reflecting this need and to capture it accurately even if the
information is incomplete or poorly expressed. (2) Interpreting
results: Even if the user is able to perfectly express a query, the
answer might be split over thousands or millions of Web pages
or not exist at all. In this context, numerous questions need to be
addressed. Examples include: How do we handle a large
answer? How do we rank results? How do we select the
documents that really are of interest to the user? Even in the
case of a single document candidate, the document itself could
be large. How do we browse such documents efficiently?

ACM Categories & Descriptors:
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]

General Terms:
Algorithms, Human Factors

Keywords:
Web Retrieval, User Interaction
Ricardo Baeza-Yates is VP of Yahoo! Research for Europe and
Latin America, leading the labs at Barcelona, Spain and Santiago,
Chile. Until 2005, he was director of the Center for Web Research
at the CS department of the University of Chile, and ICREA
Professor at the Dept. of ICT of University Pompeu Fabra in
Barcelona. He is co-author of the book Modern Information
Retrieval, whose second edition will appear in 2010, among more
than 200 publications. He has received the organization of
American States award for young researchers in exact sciences
(1993) and the CLEI Latin American distinction for CS (2009). In
2003 he was the first computer scientist to be elected to the Chilean
Academy of Sciences and in 2009 was named ACM Fellow.
Yoelle Maarek is the Senior Director of Yahoo! Research in Haifa,
Israel since 2009. Prior to this, Yoelle was the Director of Google
Haifa Engineering Center, which she opened in 2006. There, she
led the development of "Google Suggest", a query completion
feature deployed on google.com and YouTube worldwide. From
1989 until 2006, Yoelle was with IBM Research, first in the US,
and then in Israel, where she led the search and collaboration
department and became a Distinguished Engineer. She graduated
from the ENPC in Paris, France, and received her DEA in CS from
Paris VI University, both in 1985. Yoelle obtained her PhD in CS
from Technion in 1989. She has served as co-chair of the technical
program of WWW'2009, and as senior PC member at several
SIGIR and WWW conferences. Yoelle is also a member of the
Board of Directors of the Caesarea-Rothschild Institute at Haifa
University and of the Board of Governors of the Technion.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

907

