Information Retrieval Challenges
in Computational Advertising
Andrei Broder, Evgeniy Gabrilovich, Vanja Josifovski
Yahoo! Research, Santa Clara, CA, USA
{broder, gabr, vanjaj} @ yahoo-inc.com
and Text Analysis in IBM Research. From 1999 until 2002 he was
VP for Research and Chief Scientist at the AltaVista Company.
He was graduated Summa cum Laude from Technion, the Israeli
Institute of Technology, and obtained his M.Sc. and Ph.D. at
Stanford University under Don Knuth. He has authored more than
a hundred papers and was awarded twenty-five patents. He is a
member of the US National Academy of Engineering, a fellow of
ACM and of IEEE, and past chair of the IEEE Technical
Committee on Mathematical Foundations of Computing.

Abstract:
Computational advertising is an emerging scientific sub-discipline,
at the intersection of large scale search and text analysis,
information retrieval, statistical modeling, machine learning,
classification, optimization, and microeconomics. The central
challenge of computational advertising is to find the "best match"
between a given user in a given context and a suitable
advertisement. The aim of this tutorial is to present the state of the
art in Computational Advertising, in particular in its IR-related
aspects, and to expose the participants to the current research
challenges in this field. The tutorial does not assume any prior
knowledge of Web advertising, and will begin with a
comprehensive background survey.

http://research.yahoo.com/Andrei_Broder

Evgeniy Gabrilovich is a Senior Research Scientist and Manager
of the NLP & IR Group at Yahoo! Research. Recently, he
organized a workshop on the synergy between user-contributed
knowledge and research in AI at IJCAI'09, and a workshop on
information retrieval for advertising at SIGIR'09. Evgeniy
presented tutorials on computational advertising at CIKM'09,
IJCAI'09, ACL'08, and EC'08. He served on the program
committees of WWW, WSDM, SIGIR, CIKM, AAAI, ACL,
EMNLP, ICWSM, HLT, COLING, and JCDL. Evgeniy earned
his M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in Computer Science from the
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology.

Going deeper, our focus will be on using a textual representation
of the user context to retrieve relevant ads. At first approximation,
this process can be reduced to a conventional setup by
constructing a query that describes the user context and executing
the query against a large inverted index of ads. We show how to
augment this approach using query expansion and text
classification techniques tuned for the ad-retrieval problem. In
particular, we show how to use the Web as a repository of queryspecific knowledge and use the Web search results retrieved by
the query as a form of a relevance feedback and query expansion.
We also present solutions that go beyond the conventional bag of
words indexing by constructing additional features using a large
external taxonomy and a lexicon of named entities obtained by
analyzing the entire Web as a corpus.

http://research.yahoo.com/Evgeniy_Gabrilovich
Vanja Josifovski is a Principal Research Scientist at Yahoo!
Research, where he works on search and advertisement
technologies for the Internet. He is currently exploring designs for
the next generation ad placement platforms for textual and
behavioral advertising. Previously, Vanja was a Research Staff
Member at the IBM Almaden Research Center working on several
projects in database runtime and optimization, federated databases,
and enterprise. He earned his M.Sc. degree from the University of
Florida at Gainesville and his Ph.D. from the Linkoping
University in Sweden. Vanja has published over 50 peer reviewed
publications, authored around 40 patent applications, and was on
the program committees of WWW, SIGIR, ICDE, VLDB, CIKM,
ICDM, KDD and other major conferences in the database,
information retrieval, and search areas.

The last part of the tutorial will be devoted to a potpourri of recent
research results and open problems inspired by Computational
Advertising challenges in text summarization, natural language
generation, named entity recognition, computer-human
interaction, and other SIGIR-relevant areas.

ACM Categories & Descriptors:
H.3.3 Information Search and Retrieval

General Terms:
Algorithms, Experimentation.

Keywords:

http://research.yahoo.com/Vanja_Josifovski

Online advertising, sponsored search, content match

Bio/Bios:
Andrei Broder is a Yahoo! Fellow and Vice President
Computational Advertising. Previously he was an IBM
Distinguished Engineer and the CTO of the Institute for Search
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

908

