Extraction of Open-Domain Class Attributes from Text:
Building Blocks for Faceted Search
Marius Paşca
Google Inc., mars@google.com
Abstract: Knowledge automatically extracted from text captures
instances, classes of instances and relations among them. In
particular, the acquisition of class attributes (e.g., “top speed”,
“body style” and “number of cylinders” for the class of “sports
cars”) from text is a particularly appealing task and has received
much attention recently, given its natural fit as a building block
towards the far-reaching goal of constructing knowledge bases
from text. This tutorial provides an overview of extraction
methods developed in the area of Web-based information
extraction, with the purpose of acquiring attributes of opendomain classes. The attributes are extracted for classes organized
either as a flat set or hierarchically. The extraction methods
operate over unstructured or semi-structured text available within
collections of Web documents, or over relatively more intriguing
data sources consisting of anonymized search queries. The
methods take advantage of weak supervision provided in the
form of seed examples or small amounts of annotated data, or
draw upon knowledge already encoded within human-compiled
resources (e.g., Wikipedia). The more ambitious methods,
aiming at acquiring as many accurate attributes from text as
possible for hundreds or thousands of classes covering a wide
range of domains of interest, need to be designed to scale to Web

collections. This restriction has significant consequences on the
overall complexity and choice of underlying tools, in order for the
extracted attributes to ultimately aid information retrieval in
general and Web search in particular, by producing relevant
attributes for open-domain classes, along with other types of
relations among instances or among classes.
ACM Categories & Descriptors: H.3.3 Information Storage
and Retrieval - Content Analysis and Indexing; I.2.7. Artificial
Intelligence - Natural Language Processing
General Terms: Algorithms, Experimentation
Keywords: Information extraction, knowledge acquisition, class
attributes, attribute extraction
Bio: Marius Paşca is a Senior Research Scientist at Google. He
graduated with a Ph.D. degree in Computer Science from
Southern Methodist University in Dallas, Texas and an M.Sc.
degree in Computer Science from Joseph Fourier University in
Grenoble, France. Current research interests include factual
information extraction from unstructured text and its applications
to Web search.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

909

