From Federated to Aggregated Search
Fernando Diaz
Yahoo! Labs, diazf@yahoo-inc.com

Mounia Lalmas
University of Glasgow, mounia@acm.org

Milad Shokouhi
Microsoft Research, milads@microsoft.com

Abstract:

General Terms

Federated search refers to the brokered retrieval of content from a
set of auxiliary retrieval systems instead of from a single,
centralized retrieval system. Federated search tasks occur in, for
example, digital libraries (where documents from several retrieval
systems must be seamlessly merged) or peer-to-peer information
retrieval (where documents distributed across a network of local
indexes must be retrieved).

Algorithms, Design, Experimentation, Measurement

In the context of web search, aggregated search refers to the
integration of non-web content (e.g. images, videos, news articles,
maps, tweets) into a web search result page. This is in contrast
with classic web search where users are presented with a ranked
list consisting exclusively of general web documents. As in other
federated search situations, the non-web content is often retrieved
from auxiliary retrieval systems (e.g. image or video databases,
news indexes).

Fernando Diaz is a research scientist at Yahoo! Labs. His primary
research interests concern formal models of information retrieval,
and more recently aggregated search. His research experience also
includes distributed information retrieval approaches to web
search, interactive and faceted retrieval, mining of temporal
patterns from news and query logs, cross-lingual information
retrieval, graph-based retrieval methods, and synthesizing
information from multiple corpora. He received his PhD from the
University of Massachusetts Amherst in 2008.

Keywords
Distributed information retrieval, Federated search, Aggregated
search, Universal search, Vertical search, Metasearch

Bios:

Although aggregated search can be seen as an instance of
federated search, several aspects make aggregated search a unique
and compelling research topic. These include large sources of
evidence (e.g. click logs) for deciding what non-web items to
return, constrained interfaces (e.g. mobile screens), and a very
heterogeneous set of available auxiliary resources (e.g. images,
videos, maps, news articles). Each of these aspects introduces
problems and opportunities not addressed in the federated search
literature.

Mounia Lalmas holds a Microsoft Research/Royal Academy of
Engineering Research Chair in Information Retrieval at the
Department of Computing Science, University of Glasgow. Her
research focuses on the development and evaluation of intelligent
access to interactive heterogeneous and complex information
repositories. From 2002 until 2007, she co-led the Evaluation
Initiative for XML Retrieval (INEX). She is now working on
technologies for aggregated search and bridging the digital divide.
She is also looking at the use of quantum theory to model
interactive information retrieval.

Aggregated search is an important future research direction for
information retrieval. All major search engines now provide
aggregated search results. As the number of available auxiliary
resources grows, deciding how to effectively surface content from
each will become increasingly important.

Milad Shokouhi is an applied researcher working for Bing at
Microsoft Research Cambridge. Before joining Microsoft in 2007,
he did his PhD on federated search at the Royal Melbourne
Institute of Technology (RMIT) University. His research interests
are federated search, query expansion, user studies and web search
evaluation.

The goal of this tutorial is to provide an overview of federated
search and aggregated search techniques for an intermediate
information retrieval researcher. At the same time, the content will
be valuable for practitioners in industry. We will take the audience
through the most influential work in these areas and describe how
they relate to real world aggregated search systems. We will also
list some of the new challenges confronted in aggregated search
and discuss directions for future work.

ACM Categories & Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search
and Retrieval

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

910

