Search and Browse Log Mining for Web Information
Retrieval: Challenges, Methods, and Applications
Daxin Jiang

(Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China,
djiang@microsoft.com)

Jian Pei

(Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC
Canada, jpei@cs.sfu.ca)

Hang Li

(Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China,
hangli@microsoft.com)
Abstract: Huge amounts of search log data have been
accumulated in various search engines. Currently, a commercial
search engine receives billions of queries and collects tera-bytes of
log data on any single day. Other than search log data, browse logs
can be collected by client-side browser plug-ins, which record the
browse information if users' permissions are granted. Such
massive amounts of search/browse log data, on the one hand,
provide great opportunities to mine the wisdom of crowds and
improve search results as well as online advertisement. On the
other hand, designing effective and efficient methods to clean,
model, and process large scale log data also presents great
challenges.

Bios: Daxin Jiang is a Researcher at Microsoft Research Asia.
His research focuses on data mining and information retrieval. He
received Ph.D. in computer science from the State University of
New York at Buffalo. He has published extensively in prestigious
conferences and journals, and served as a PC member of many
conferences. He received the Best Application Paper Award of
SIGKDD'08 and the Runner-up for Best Application Paper Award
of SIGKDD'04.
Jian Pei is an Associate Professor and the Associate Director,
Research, of the School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser
University. His research focuses on data mining and analytic
queries in databases. With prolific publications in refereed
journals and conferences, he is the recipient of several prestigious
awards. He is an associate editor of ACM Transactions on
Knowledge Discovery from Data (TKDD) and IEEE Transactions

In this tutorial, we focus on mining search and browse log data for
Web information retrieval. We consider a Web information
retrieval system consisting of four components, namely, query
understanding, document understanding, query-document
matching, and user understanding. Accordingly, we organize the
tutorial materials along these four aspects. For each aspect, we will
survey the major tasks, challenges, fundamental principles, and
state-of-the-art methods.

on Knowledge and Data Engineering (TKDE). He has served
regularly in the organization committees and the program
committees of numerous international conferences and workshops.
He is a senior member of both ACM and IEEE.

The goal of this tutorial is to provide a systematic survey on largescale search/browse log mining to the IR community. It will help
IR researchers to get familiar with the core challenges and
promising directions in log mining. At the same time, this tutorial
may also serve the developers of Web information retrieval
systems as a comprehensive and in-depth reference to the
advanced log mining techniques.

Hang Li is a Senior Researcher and Research Manager at
Microsoft Research Asia. His research areas include natural
language processing, information retrieval, statistical machine
learning, and data mining. He graduated from Kyoto University
and holds a PhD in computer science from the University of
Tokyo. Hang has about 80 publications in international
conferences and journals. He is associate editor of ACM
Transaction on Asian Language Information Processing and area
editor of Journal for Computer and Science Technology, etc. His
recent academic activities include senior PC member of SIGIR
2010, WSDM 2010, and KDD 2010, area chair of ACL 2010, and
PC member of WWW 2010.

ACM Categories & Descriptors: H.3.3 [Information Storage and
Retrieval]: Information Search and Retrieval
General Terms: Algorithms, Experimentation
Keywords: Search and browse logs, log data mining

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

912

