Information Retrieval for E-Discovery
David D. Lewis
David D. Lewis Consulting, sigir2010tutorial@DavidDLewis.com

Abstract:

Bio:

Discovery, the process under which parties to legal cases must
reveal documents relevant to the disputed issues is a core aspect
of trials in the United States, and a lesser but important factor in
other countries. Discovery on documents stored in
computerized systems (known variously as electronic discovery,
e-discovery, e-disco, EDD, and ED) is increasingly the major
factor in discovery, and has become a multi-billion dollar
industry.

David D. Lewis, Ph.D. is a freelance computer scientist based in
Chicago, IL, USA. He works in the areas of information retrieval,
data mining, natural language processing, and the evaluation of
complex information systems. Dave Lewis has consulted for
startups, corporations, investors, universities, nonprofits,
government agencies, and law firms. Before becoming a
consultant he held research positions at AT&T Labs, Bell Labs,
and the University of Chicago. He has published more than fifty
scientific papers and six patents, and was elected a Fellow of the
American Association for the Advancement of Science in 2006.

I will discuss the basics of e-discovery, the scale and diversity of
the materials involved, and the economics of identifying and
reviewing potentially responsive material. I will then focus on
three major IR areas of interest: search, supervised machine
learning (including text classification and relevance feedback),
and interface support for manual relevance assessment. For each,
I will discuss technologies currently used in e-discovery, the
evaluation methods applicable to measuring effectiveness, and
existing research results not yet seeing commercial practice.

Dr. Lewis was one of the founders of the TREC Legal Track, the
first large scale open evaluation of IR technology for electronic
discovery in legal cases. As part of this work, he led the creation
of the first large scale test collection for experimentation on ediscovery. He has served as a consulting expert in a number of
legal cases, including writing a report to the court on the use of IR
in e-discovery. He recently developed training materials for
paralegals and lawyers working on e-discovery matters at a
Fortune 100 company.

I will also outline research directions that, if successfully pursued,
would potentially be of great interest in e-discovery applications.
A particular focus will be on areas where researchers can make
progress without access to operational e-discovery environments
or "realistic" test collections. Connections will be drawn with the
use of IR in related tasks, such as enterprise search, criminal
investigations, intelligence analysis, historical research, truth and
reconciliation commissions, and freedom of information (open
records or sunshine law) requests.

ACM Categories & Descriptors:
H.3.3 Information Search and Retrieval; H.4.1 Office Automation;
I.2.1 Artificial Intelligence, Applications and Expert Systems Law

General Terms:
Economics, Experimentation, Legal Aspects, Measurement

Keywords:
backups, computer forensics, document formats, duplicate
detection, e-mail, electronic mail, OCR, text mining

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

913

