User Interface Designs to Support the
Social Transfer of Web Search Expertise
Neema Moraveji
Learning Sciences & Technology Design, School of Education
Human-Computer Interaction, Department of Computer Science
Stanford University

neema@stanford.edu
ABSTRACT

the learner in order to help them construct a valid mental model of
how to enact the practice.

While there are many ways to develop search expertise, I maintain
that most members of the general public do so in an inefficient
manner. One reason is that, with current tools, is difficult to
observe experts as a means of acquiring search expertise in a
scalable fashion. This calls for a redesign of computer-mediated
communication tools to make individual search strategies visible
to other users. I present a research agenda to investigate this
claim, which draws upon theories of social learning. I use designbased research to build novel systems that enable imitation-based
learning of search expertise.

We design and study technologies that enable individuals to a)
transmit their own search processes and b) model others’ search
processes and practices. Such technologies would “make
knowledge visible” [1] between participants, creating
opportunities for cognitive apprenticeship. To this end, my
research aims to answer the following research questions:
Can search expertise be positively and significantly impacted by
technology-mediated social interaction? What are the design
principles for such technologies?
Our first work that investigated this idea was the ClassSearch
system, meant for a classroom environment. Search metadata
from student computers was projected onto a shared display in tag
cloud and related forms. Students used the newfound common
ground created by the system to generate interactions between
each other about search practices. This system motivated further
inquiry into technology-mediated social learning of expertise.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.1.2 [Human Factors]: Human Information Processing.

General Terms
Design, Human Factors

Keywords
Social, learning, information retrieval, transfer, expertise.

The next research platform we built, LineHive.com, rests upon a
simple premise: it is currently difficult to communicate a
summary of a set of related websites and people would also use
such a tool to transmit navigation and path information to one
another. The user can choose what sites to string together into a
list. To incent users to share search processes, we represent
navigation paths as attractive, chronological timelines that can be
embedded in any page as a widget (like a YouTube video). The
timeline visualization is meant as a communicative proxy for
users to share insights found on the Internet with one another. The
‘search expertise’ learning goal is co-opting this medium.

1. LEARNING SEARCH SOCIALLY
“Not all who wander are lost.” –J.R.R. Tolkien
Expertise in web search has become so crucial a skill that it is
referred to as one of several ‘digital literacies’ [3]. It includes
generating appropriate keywords, understanding the reasoning
behind ranking order, discerning legitimate from illegitimate
pages, identifying relevance of individual sites, reformulating
queries, and synthesizing information gleaned from results.

My work will identify the characteristics of peer search processes
that will positively impact one’s expertise and will determine how
and when to display those processes to improve expertise. It
draws upon prior work in search instruction and social learning to
design novel, scalable systems to improve search expertise.

Web search interfaces have evolved in such a way that users can
learn how to use them iteratively, through trial-and-error, rather
than reading or following best practices. There is currently lacking
a sociocultural practice of learning to search from one another.
Simply showing expert search queries and results to other users
would not lead to conceptual learning. This is because any
individual search is not often reusable for other users’ information
needs. That is, information needs vary widely and are contextrelevant, so viewing another’s search results may not be most
efficient for teaching expertise of the search process itself.

2. REFERENCES
[1] Bereiter, C., Scardamalia, M. (2003). "Learning to Work
Creatively with Knowledge" EARLI Advances in Learning
and Instruction.
[2] Collins, A., Brown, J. S., & Newman, S. E. (1987).
Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching the craft of reading,
writing and mathematics. BBN Labs, Cambridge, MA.

It is the mental processes underlying search that are important to
imitate. To transfer these processes, we draw upon the theory of
cognitive apprenticeship [2], which posits that experts should
reveal tacit and implicit components of their thought processes to

[3] Jenkins, H. Confronting the Challenges of Participatory
Culture: Media Education for the 21st Century. 2006.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

915

