Leveraging User Interaction and Collaboration for
Improving Multilingual Information Access in Digital
Libraries
Juliane Stiller
Berlin School of Library and Information Science, Humboldt University
Dorotheenstr. 26
10117 Berlin, Germany

juliane.stiller@ibi.hu-berlin.de
ABSTRACT

2.

HARNESSING USER INPUT

The goal of interactive cross-lingual information retrieval systems
is to support users in formulating effective queries and selecting the
documents which satisfy their information needs regardless of the
language of these documents. This dissertation aims at harnessing
user-system interaction, extracting the added value and integrating
it back into the system to improve cross-lingual information retrieval for successive users. To achieve this, user input at different
interaction points will be evaluated. This will, among others, include interaction during user-assisted query translations, implicit
and explicit relevance feedback and social tags. To leverage this
input, explorative studies need to be conducted to determine beneficial user input and the methods of extracting it.

In CLIR systems, interactive components are crucial to accomplish search tasks [2]. There are two main scenarios where the user
input could be incorporated into the system to enhance multilingual
information retrieval:
1. Harnessing multilingual tags for enriching metadata and disambiguating query terms and
2. Improving existing dictionaries by adding translations entered into the system by the user, e.g. directly from the user
or via log files analysis.
In this project, interactive CLIR focuses on input from previous
user-system interactions which can offer improvements for CLIR
tools. This requires the identification of different interaction points,
where users are encouraged to leave their feedback in the form of
alternative translations, relevance feedback or tags. This input will
be collected and integrated back into the CLIR system. To gather
data, the user input at different points of user interaction will be
analyzed to identify the added value. A method to harness this
input and to integrate it back into the system will be determined
accordingly, e.g. evaluation of query logs [1].
Europeana - a multilingual digital library - will serve as main
research object for explorative studies. Unifying the different results from these experiments will provide a basis for determining
the benefits of user interaction for CLIR in digital libraries. These
results will serve as use cases for interaction which enhances CLIR
and can easily be prototyped. The project will include a final analysis of the effectiveness of different interactive features within CLIR
systems.

Categories and Subject Descriptors:
H.3.7. [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Digital Libraries -user
issues; H.3.7. [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information
Search and Retrieval
General Terms: Design, Human Factors, Languages
Keywords: Interactive CLIR, Digital Libraries, Social tags

1. INTRODUCTION
Digital Libraries which aggregate and provide access to collections in different languages are confronted with problems of multilingual information access (MLIA). The most challenging aspect
is the search capability of the system, which is referred to as crosslingual information retrieval (CLIR). CLIR is characterized by differences in query and document language [3]. The main difficulties
for CLIR are the disambiguation of the query term in the source and
target language and the identification of the query language. Tools
for CLIR such as dictionaries are not universally available in every
language needed or in every domain covered in digital libraries.
This dissertation aims at harnessing user input for improving and
extending existing CLIR processing tools and consequently CLIR
systems in their entirety. The goal is to bridge a gap between research on interactive cross-lingual information retrieval and studies
focusing on establishing sustainable ways to leverage user input.
In this context, user interaction and collaboration comprises social tagging and other system interaction components like query
reformulations and relevance feedback.

3.

REFERENCES

[1] A. Bosca and L. Dini. Cacao project at the logclef track. In
Working notes of the Cross Language Evaluation Forum
(CLEF), 2009.
[2] J. Gonzalo. Scenarios for interactive cross-language retrieval
systems. In Proceedings of the Workshop of Cross-Language
Information Retrieval: A Research Roadmap Workshop held
at the 25th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference,
2002.
[3] D. W. Oard. Multilingual information access. In M. J. Bates
and M. N. Maack, editors, Encyclopedia of Library and
Information Sciences. Taylor & Francis, 3rd edition, 2009.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

916

