Entity Information Management in Complex Networks
Yi Fang
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
250 N. University Street
West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA

fangy@cs.purdue.edu
How can the existing cross-language IR work be leveraged
to build entity proﬁles with multi-lingual evidence?
I propose to use probabilistic models and discriminative
models in particular to address the above research questions.
In my research, I have developed discriminative models for
expert search to integrate arbitrary document features [3]
and to learn ﬂexible combination strategies to rank experts
in heterogeneous information sources [1]. Discriminative
graphical models are proposed to jointly discover homepages
by inference on the homepage dependence network [2]. The
dependence of table elements is exploited to collectively perform the entity retrieval task [4]. These works have shown
the power of discriminative models for entity search and the
beneﬁts of utilizing the dependencies among related entities. What I would like to do next is to develop a uniﬁed
probabilistic framework to investigate the research questions
raised in this proposal.

ABSTRACT
Entity information management (EIM) deals with organizing, processing and delivering information about entities.
Its emergence is a result of satisfying more sophisticated information needs that go beyond document search. In the
recent years, entity retrieval has attracted much attention
in the IR community. INEX has started the XML Entity
Ranking track since 2007 and TREC has launched the Entity track since 2009 to investigate the problem of related
entity ﬁnding. Some EIM problems go beyond retrieval and
ranking such as: 1) entity proﬁling, which is about characterizing a speciﬁc entity, and 2) entity distillation, which is
about discovering the trend about an entity. These problems
have received less attention while they have many important
applications.
On the other hand, the entities in the real world or in the
Web environment are usually not isolated. They are connected or related with each other in one way or another.
For example, the coauthorship makes the authors with similar research interests be connected. The emergence of social
media such as Facebook, Twitter and Youtube has further
interweaved the related entities in a much larger scale. Millions of users in these sites can become friends, fans or followers of others, or taggers or commenters of diﬀerent types
of entities (e.g., bookmarks, photos and videos). These networks are complex in the sense that they are heterogeneous
with multiple types of entities and of interactions, they are
large-scale, they are multi-lingual, and they are dynamic.
These features of the complex networks go beyond traditional social network analysis and require further research.
In this proposed research, I investigate entity information
management in the environment of complex networks. The
main research question is: how can the EIM tasks be facilitated by modeling the content and structure of complex networks? The research is in the intersection of content based
information retrieval and complex network analysis, which
deals with both unstructured text data and structured networks. The speciﬁc targeting EIM tasks are entity retrieval,
entity proﬁling and entity distillation. In addition to the
main research question, the following questions are considered: How can we accomplish a EIM task involving diverse
entity and interaction types? How to model the evolution of
entity proﬁles as well as the underlying complex networks?

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: H.3.1 Content Analysis and Indexing; H.3.3 Information Search and
Retrieval; H.3.4 Systems and Software; H.4 [Information
Systems Applications]: H.4.2 Types of Systems; H.4.m
Miscellaneous

General Terms
Algorithms, Measurement, Performance, Experimentation

Keywords
Entity retrieval, Entity proﬁling, Social network analysis

1.

REFERENCES

[1] Y. Fang, L. Si, and A. Mathur. Ranking experts with
discriminative probabilistic models. In Proceedings of SIGIR
Workshops, 2009.
[2] Y. Fang, L. Si, and A. Mathur. Discriminative graphical
models for faculty homepage discovery. Information
Retrieval, 2010.
[3] Y. Fang, L. Si, and A. Mathur. Discriminative models of
integrating document evidence and document-candidate
associations for expert search. In Proceedings of SIGIR,
2010.
[4] Y. Fang, L. Si, Z. Yu, Y. Xian, and Y. Xu. Entity retrieval
by hierarchical relevance model, exploiting the structure of
tables and learning homepage classiﬁers. In Proceedings of
TREC-18, 2009.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

917

