Finding People and their Utterances in Social Media
Wouter Weerkamp
w.weerkamp@uva.nl
ISLA, University of Amsterdam, Science Park 107, 1098 XG Amsterdam

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: H.3.3 Information Search
and Retrieval

General Terms
Algorithms, Theory, Experimentation, Measurement

Keywords
Social media, information retrieval

ABSTRACT
Since its introduction, social media, “a group of internet-based applications that (. . . ) allow the creation and exchange of user generated content” [1], has attracted more and more users. Over the
years, many platforms have arisen that allow users to publish information, communicate with others, connect to like-minded, and
share anything a users wants to share. Text-centric examples are
mailing lists, forums, blogs, community question answering, collaborative knowledge sources, social networks, and microblogs,
with new platforms starting all the time. Given the volume of information available in social media, ways of accessing this information intelligently are needed; this is the scope of my research.
Why should we care about information in social media? Here
are three examples that motivate my interest. (A) Viewpoint research; someone wants to take note of the viewpoints on a particular issue. (B) Answers to problems; many problems have been
encountered before, and people have shared solutions. (C) Product
development; gaining insight into how people use a product and
what features they wish for, eases the development of new products. Looking at these examples of information need in social media, we observe that they revolve not just around relevance in the
traditional sense (i.e., objects relevant to a given topic), but also
around criteria like credibility, authority, viewpoints, expertise, and
experiences. However, these additional aspects are typically conditioned on the topical relevance of information objects.
In social media, “information objects” come in several types but
many are utterances created by people (blog posts, emails, questions, answers, tweets). People and their utterances offer two natural entry points to information contained in social media: utterances that are relevant and people that are of interest. I focus on
three tasks in which the interaction between the two is key.
The first task concerns finding utterances in social media. Although this resembles a traditional ad hoc retrieval task, the lack
of top-down rules and editors in social media entails the use of unexpected language: spelling and grammar errors are not corrected,

and the vocabulary is unrestricted, unlike edited content. In my research, I use two features of social media to overcome the problem
of unexpected language: (i) I translate several credibility indicators
to measurable features, and implement these in the blog post retrieval process to enhance retrieval effectiveness [2]; (ii) Utterances
are surrounded by their environment, and this influences their content. I use this observation to introduce a model for query modeling
using external collections [5], and investigate which context levels
are useful in email retrieval [4].
The second task, finding people in social media, is operationalized in blog feed search: identify blogs that show a recurring interest in a given topic. This task shows similarities with expert finding,
and models from this field have been successfully adopted. Blogbased models build and rank representations of bloggers based on
their utterances, whereas post-based models rank utterances and aggregate scores to construct a ranking of bloggers. The former capture the centrality of the topic to the blog, but are not very efficient;
the latter can identify interesting posts and are efficient. In [6, 7]
I introduce a two-stage model that ranks utterances and constructs
models for the blogs these utterances belong to and ranks these
blog models. My two-stage model is more efficient than blog-based
models, and more effective than post-based models.
The third and final task builds on the previous two, and focuses
on finding utterances using people. Applied to search in email
archives, personal profiles can be constructed from people’s utterances. On top of these personal profiles, communication profiles
are built, containing information extracted from threads, quotes and
replies as well as linguistic clues. Communication profiles can indicate the role of people in a topic-dependent way. For a given
topic, I use both communication and personal profiles of people to
find utterances that are relevant to the topic [3].

References
[1] A. M. Kaplan and M. Haenlein. Users of the world, unite!
the challenges and opportunities of social media. Business
Horizons, 53(1):59–68, 2010.
[2] W. Weerkamp and M. de Rijke. Credibility improves topical
blog post retrieval. In ACL-08: HLT, pages 923–931, 2008.
[3] W. Weerkamp and M. de Rijke. Communication and personal
profiles in email search. In To be submitted, 2010.
[4] W. Weerkamp, K. Balog, and M. de Rijke. Using contextual
information to improve search in email archives. In ECIR
2009, 2009.
[5] W. Weerkamp, K. Balog, and M. de Rijke. A generative blog
post retrieval model that uses query expansion based on external collections. In ACL-ICNLP 2009, 2009.
[6] W. Weerkamp, K. Balog, and M. de Rijke. Blog feed search
using a post index. Submitted, 2010.
[7] W. Weerkamp, K. Balog, and M. de Rijke. A two-stage model
for blog feed search. In SIGIR 2010, 2010.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

918

