Leveraging User-Generated Content for News Search
Richard M. C. McCreadie

Department of Computing Science
University of Glasgow
Glasgow, G12 8QQ

richardm@dcs.gla.ac.uk

Categories and Subject Descriptors

search environment where users begin querying for events within a
couple of minutes of their occurrence [4], relying on slow newswire
reporting is unacceptable. On the other-hand, UGC sources such as
Twitter provide a natural alternative, as the high post rate and popularity of news topics makes a site such as this an ideal medium
from which to monitor emerging events. Indeed, many paid journalists maintain personal blogs and other social media accounts for
the reporting of fast-breaking news stories [2].
Lastly, we examine the presentation of results to the user. The
presentation of news articles to satisfy news-searches is generally
accepted. However, with the ever-increasing pace of news reporting
world-wide, there is now no guarantee that a trusted news source
will have yet published upon the story. In these cases, one must
look else-where for content to satisfy the user. We hypothesise that
UGC is ideal for presentation in these cases as the delay between
an event occurring and commentary appearing in UGC sources like
Twitter or the Blogosphere is mear minutes. Moreover some information needs cannot be easily solved using newswire articles
alone. For example, the correct result for the query ‘current news’
would be a list of news stories ranked by their importance for the
day in question. This is a difficult ranking problem, as ‘importance’
is greatly dependent upon the perspective of the user. In this case,
one solution might be to leverage ‘public opinion’ as represented
in UGC, for example by taking ‘the pulse of the Blogosphere’. Indeed, we have examined such during TREC 2009.
In conclusion, we have identified multiple areas of the newssearch process which cannot be satisfied by traditional newswire
articles. We hypothesise that the application of user-generated content can be leveraged to improve the field of news-search in relation
to the rich and timely information that UGC provides.

H.3.3 [Information Storage & Retrieval]: Information Search &
Retrieval

General Terms - Experimentation
Keywords - News, Blogs, Social Media
ABSTRACT

Over the last few years both availability and accessibility of current
news stories on the Web have dramatically improved [3]. In particular, users can now access news from a variety of sources hosted
on the Web, from newswire presences such as the New York Times,
to integrated news search within Web search engines. However, of
central interest is the emerging impact that user-generated content
(UGC) is having on this online news landscape. Indeed, the emergence of Web 2.0 has turned a static news consumer base into a
dynamic news machine, where news stories are summarised and
commented upon. In summary, value is being added to each news
story in terms of additional content.
Importantly, however, while there has been movement in commercial circles to exploit this extra value to enrich online news [5],
there has been little research from the academic community on how
can be achieved. Indeed, the main purpose of this thesis is to research practical techniques for the integration of UGC to improve
the news search component of the most ubiquitous of Web tools,
i.e the Web search engine. Importantly, we identify the following
three key aspects of news search which might be improved through
the application of UGC.
Intuitively, the first task that the news vertical search aspect of
a Web search engine needs to accomplish when confronted with a
user query is to decide whether the query is in fact news-related,
and hence requires news content to be included. However, queries
themselves are sparse in nature, being often comprised of one of
two tokens only. This presents issues when performing query classification, as there are few features to distinguish the news related
queries. We attest that UGC can help alleviate this ambiguity. Indeed, we hypothesise that there is a strong link between the volume
of UGC content being posted mentioning a query and the likelihood
of that query being news-related within a specific timeframe.
Secondly, we consider the task of real-time event detection. It is
imperative for search engines to maintain knowledge of the events
of the moment, such that the results displayed are updated. Traditionally, systems have detected new events through the clustering
of newswire articles [1]. However, in the current fast-paced news

1. REFERENCES

[1] James Allan. Topic detection and tracking. Springer, 2002.
[2] D. Matheson. Weblogs and the epistemology of the news: some trends
in online journalism. New Media and Society, 6(4):443–468, 2004.
[3] Newspaper Association of America (NAA). Newspaper Web sites
attract more than 70 million visitors in June; over one-third of all
Internet users visit newspaper Web sites, 2010. http:
//www.naa.org/PressCenter/SearchPressReleases/
2009/NEWSPAPER-WEB-SITES-ATTRACT-MORE-THAN-70MILLION-VISITORS.aspx, accessed on 25/01/2010.
[4] J. Pedersen. Keynote speech. In the Third Annual Workshop on Search
in Social Media, 2010.
[5] Amit Singhal. Relevance meets the real-time Web, 2010.
http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2009/12/
relevance-meets-real-time-web.html, accessed on
25/01/2010.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

919

