User Centered Story Tracking
Ilija Subašić
Department of Computer Science
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven
Celestijnenlaan 200A - bus 2402
3001 Heverlee, Belgium

ilija.subasic@cs.kuleuven.be
ABSTRACT

detection based on the increase the in frequency of normalized bi-gram co-occurrences, and then use the discovered
patterns to build a visual summarization as a graph. Interacting with the the graph enables users to build topics,
or focus on entities they are interested in, and discover the
“facts” behind the changes in a story. To test our methods
we created two corpora comprising of a time-stamped set of
documents and a set of editor-created “ground-truth” reference sentences. The developed tool and test procedures aim
to answer following research questions: (Q1): Does the proposed graphical representation improve user comprehension
and navigation of stories? (Q2): Can the proposed burst discovery algorithm based on local patterns be used for story
tracking? (Q3): How can diﬀerent bursty-pattern representation be used for discovering the underlying “facts” behind
the changes in document sets? (Q4): How can users beneﬁt
from methods and interfaces for story tracking? (Q5): How
should the documents be ordered for story tracking?
The main contributions of our so far carried out research
to answer these questions are: (a) model story tracking as
an interactive task [?], (b) deﬁne an evaluation framework
for TTM methods, and (c) build tools for supporting story
tracking [?]. The developed tool1 and the new evaluation
techniques, will let us carry out novel user experiments.

Using news provider services available on the Internet has for
many people become the main medium for staying informed
about the world. Such services support Internet users in
story tracking: following the news developments over time.
We regard a story as a set of time-stamped documents describing correlated subjects, such as for example persons,
event descriptions, and topics. Story tracking diﬀers from
“regular” search, and should go beyond retrieving the most
relevant documents, and reﬁne the search results describing
novel subjects of a story. These novel subjects are bursty
(appearing signiﬁcantly more frequently in a time window
of search than in other time) content elements, for example:
words, word n-grams, and sentences. Text-oriented versions
of the story tracking task have been described in the TAC
Update Summarization and TREC Novelty Detection and
Adaptive Filtering tasks. Recently a number of methods
have focused on mining for lower-level sub-sentential patterns. We refer to these approaches collectively as temporal
text mining (TTM). Works in these areas are mostly concerned with the system side algorithms and automatic evaluation procedures. In this work we put emphasis on the
users, and go beyond automatic algorithm evaluation by including users in the story tracking process and assessing how
diﬀerent approaches aid them in this process.
When tracking a story users have two main goals: (1)
story understanding and (2) story search. The goal of story
understanding is to comprehend the story’s subjects and
track their evolution. In order to achieve this, users will want
to inspect the story as well as the underlying documents
(story search). Here, ﬁnding the most relevant documents is
only a means to the (generally more important) end of discovering the change and their evolution and comprehending
the general the story development. This situation calls for
systems that: (a) identify important subjects and their substructure, (b) show how these substructures emerge, change,
and disappear over time, and (c) give users intuitive interfaces for interactively exploring the story landscape and at
the same time the underlying document. The user should
not be exposed to well-formatted, predeﬁned and global patterns from a machine intelligence system, but should be an
integral part of information processing. Following this idea,
we have built an interactive semi-automatic visual tool for
story tracking. We developed a method for bursty-patterns

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Search process; H.1.2 [User/Machine Systems]: Human information processing

General Terms
Human Factors, Experimentation

Keywords
temporal text mining, visualization, evaluation

1. REFERENCES
[1] I. Subašić and B. Berendt. Discovery of interactive
graphs for understanding and searching time-indexed
corpora.Knowledge and Information Systems. DOI:
10.1007/s10115-009-0227-x
[2] B. Berendt and I. Subašić. Stories in time: A
graph-based interface for news tracking and discovery.
In WI-IAT’09 Workshops, 2009. IEEE Computer
Society.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

1

920

beta version: http://sites.google.com/site/subasicilija/

