Aiming for User Experience in Information Retrieval
Towards User-Centered Relevance (UCR)
Frans van der Sluis

Betsy van Dijk

Egon L. van den Broek

Human Media Interaction,
University of Twente
P.O. Box 217, 7500AE
Enschede, The Netherlands

Human Media Interaction,
University of Twente
P.O. Box 217, 7500AE
Enschede, The Netherlands

Human Media Interaction,
University of Twente
P.O. Box 217, 7500AE
Enschede, The Netherlands

f.vandersluis@utwente.nl

bvdijk@ewi.utwente.nl

Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.3.1 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Content Analysis and Indexing; H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information
Search and Retrieval
General Terms: Human Factors, Experimentation, Algorithms.
Keywords: User Experience, Positive Aﬀect, Relevance.

vandenbroek@acm.org

pose a retrieval model, which adjusts the (ranking of the)
search results in a way optimal to the UX by evaluating the
emotional value and diﬃculty of an IO; i.e., User-Centered
Relevance (UCR).
The goal of the proposed research is to ﬁnd an optimal
relationship between UCR and topicality T , understandability U , and emotional value E. For this, a set of (textual)
features is suggested, indicative of topicality T , complexity (readability C1 , entropy C2 , semantic coherence C3 ),
and emotional value (emotional keyword spotting E1 , lexical
aﬃnity E2 ). This leads to the following models:

Research Proposal
The goal of an Information Retrieval (IR) system is to solve
the information need of its user. Research on how this goal
can best be achieved has mainly been dominated by the
concept of relevance. What is relevant or not is generally
performed by domain experts on the basis of topical similarity; i.e., topicality. Several studies have shown there is
more to relevance than topicality; e.g., topicality, novelty, reliability, understandability, and scope [3]. As [2] concludes:
“relevance, in the wider context, is a subjective, multidimensional, dynamic and situational phenomenon” (p. 63). The
multi-faceted notion of relevance pleas for a human-centered
approach. Essentially, an IR system should solve the information need of its user, with its user.
To enable the operationalization of the pivotal role of the
user in solving the information need, we adopt a framework
of User eXperience (UX). UX is a fuzzy concept, often deﬁned as technology use beyond its instrumental value (e.g.,
topicality for IR). Several aspects of UX have been identiﬁed; e.g., usability, beauty, hedonic, emotions, temporality, situatedness, enjoyment, motivation, and challenge. Together, these aspects explain part of the UX [1] and are
intrinsically related to persistence and eﬀort in information
problem solving. Hence, we hypothesize that solving an information need is fostered with an enhanced UX. We propose
to focus on emotional factors: addressing the antecedents
and consequences of, ideally, positive emotions.
At least two clear lines of research on emotion in IR can be
identiﬁed. One line of research shows the eﬀect of diﬃculty
(or challenge) compared to the skills of the user. Namely,
experienced diﬃculty leads to negative emotions. A second
line of research is occupied with reading the emotional value
of a text, image, or video. The emotional value of an Information Object (IO) can be considered the most direct
antecedent to emotional experience. Accordingly, we pro-

R → {T, U, E}
U → {C1...3 }
E → {E1,2 }

UCR;
Understandability;

(1)
(2)

Emotional value.

(3)

In these models the user plays a central role: for topicality T , this is through the query; for emotional value E, the
user’s preferences will inﬂuence the ﬁnal experienced emotion, and the understandability U is not only dependent
upon the complexity C of the IO but also on the skills and
knowledge of the user.
In order to create models 1-3, data is needed about when
a document is perceived as understandable and is of positive
emotional value as well as how this relates to UCR. Although
some of the aspects of UCR (e.g., understandability) can be
added directly to the interaction, we propose user studies to
ﬁnd the relative contribution of the diﬀerent aspects to UCR.
The suggested approach is to let a diverse set of stimuli
(IOs) and searches be rated by subjects. One of the most
salient challenges is in having a representative set of IOs and
queries, and to cope with the diﬀerence between users and
situations.

Acknowledgment
This work was part of the PuppyIR project, which is supported by a grant of the 7th Framework ICT Programme
(FP7-ICT-2007-3) of the European Union.

References
[1] M. Hassenzahl and N. Tractinsky. User experience - a research
agenda. The American Journal of Psychology, 25(2):91–97, 2006.
[2] I. Ruthven. Integration approaches to relevance. In A. Spink and
C. Cole, editors, New Directions in Cognitive Information Retrieval,
pages 61–80. Springer Netherlands, 2005.
[3] Y. C. Xu and Z. Chen. Relevance judgment: What do information users consider beyond topicality? J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci.
Technol., 57(7):961–973, 2006.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

924

