Preface from the General Chairs
Welcome to the 33rd edition of the ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in information retrieval.
SIGIR is the premier international forum for the presentation of new research results and the demonstration of new
systems and techniques in the broad field of information retrieval.
Welcome also to Switzerland! We are honored to be hosting SIGIR for the first time in the Latin part of
Switzerland. Last time SIGIR was held in Switzerland was 14 years ago, with SIGIR’96, in Zürich.
Geneva is a global city at the crossing between France, Italy and Switzerland. It is also between mountains, lake
and forests. Its international feeling and advantageous location makes it a beautiful place to visit. We hope that you
enjoy your stay in Geneva.
You can ask everybody who did it before us and they will confirm you that organizing SIGIR is a pleasure, but also
a big challenge. Although it is our names, and those of the PC chairs, that make it to the cover of the proceedings,
we should not forget the tremendous work done by many other people. In fact, SIGIR 2010 is 2 General Chairs, 3
Program Chairs, 15 other Chairs, 40 Senior PC members, 472 PC members, and 54 additional reviewers. This
conference would not have been possible without their work. Although you can find the names of all these people
listed in these proceedings, we want to explicitly thank some of them. First and foremost, we thank those
responsible for the technical program: our PC chairs, Hsin-Hsi Chen, Efthimis Efthimiadis, and Jacques Savoy,
who tirelessly directed the work of the senior PC members, our posters and demo chairs, Peter Bruza, Gabriella
Pasi and Ellen Voorhees, our tutorial chair, Djoerd Hiemstra, and our workshop chairs, Omar Alonso and
Giambattista Amati. Also, following the success of recent editions, SIGIR 2010 program includes an Industry Track
too, organized by David Harper, and Peter Schäuble.
Finally, our thanks go to many other individuals who worked largely behind the scenes to ensure that SIGIR 2010
would be a success, including our sponsorship chair, Dawei Song, our publicity chair, Fazli Can, our mentor chair,
Ian Ruthven, the doctoral consortium chairs, Doug Oard and Paul Thomas, and the chair of best paper award,
Norbert Fuhr.
SIGIR 2010 is, of course, sponsored by ACM, but has also received generous support from numerous companies
and organizations. This enabled us to keep the registration affordable, even in a notoriously expensive place like
Switzerland. Baidu, Google, Microsoft Research and Yahoo! Research were particularly generous with support at
the “gold” level; the Information Retrieval Facility and Yandex provided support at the “silver” level; and IBM
Research, the Special Interest Group on Information Systems of the Swiss Informatics Society (DBTA-SI) and the
Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF) supported the conference at the “bronze” level. Support has also come
from Wolfram Research and the Universities of Neuchatel and Lugano, and most importantly from the University
of Geneva, in particular in allowing us to accommodate SIGIR 2010 within its premises of Uni-Mail at the center of
Geneva.
In addition, Cambridge University Press, Elsevier, Morgan & Claypool and Springer have each made arrangements
to exhibit their publications at the conference.
We hope you will find the technical and social programs interesting and enjoyable and that you will take the
opportunity to meet old friends and make new ones in the beautiful surroundings of Geneva.

Fabio Crestani

Stéphane Marchand-Maillet

SIGIR 2010 General Chair
University of Lugano

SIGIR 2010 General Chair
University of Geneva

iii

