Preface from the Program Committee Chairs
Welcome to the 33rd ACM SIGIR International Conference of Research and Development on Information
Retrieval. SIGIR 2010 has attracted a record-breaking number of papers signalling once again the importance
of information retrieval research. We continue to see a steady growth of research output as well as a growing
diversity of subjects in our field, where emerging topics, such as learning to rank, social media search, query
logs analysis, recommender systems or advertising and search, are now reaching a relative maturity. This
year we observe a continued interest in foundational aspects of IR, such as IR theory and evaluation studies,
and also a growing interest on traditional topics, such a clustering and classification. If we want to summarize
this SIGIR conference with a single word or phrase, we can suggest "users" or "users and queries" indicating
the importance of users in search. But, we will let you discover this for yourself while delving through these
conference proceedings.
There were 520 full paper submissions representing the work of IR researchers in more than 39 countries. Of
these, 87 (16.7%) were accepted, representing the different geographic areas as follows: 42 from the
Americas, 25 from Europe – Africa and 20 from Asia - Pacific. In addition to the full papers, a further 5 were
offered the opportunity of presentation as posters. There were 90 (30.7%) posters, 10 (50%) demonstrations,
11 (52%) tutorials and 9 (50%) workshops accepted for inclusion in the technical program. A doctoral
consortium with 11 PhD candidates is also part of the technical program. It is worth noting that more than
half of the submitted papers (293, or 56%) have a student as the first author, an encouraging sign for the
growth and vitality of the IR community. We are grateful to the keynote speakers Donna Harman from
NIST, and Gary Flake from Microsoft, who agreed to share their ideas with the community.
The organization of a SIGIR conference is a demanding multi-year task, and its success depends on the
dedicated effort of many people. We are grateful to the conference general chairs Fabio Crestani and
Stéphane Marchand-Maillet for running SIGIR 2010. We are also grateful to the other chairs who helped
create the SIGIR program: Peter Bruza, Gabriella Pasi, Ellen Voorhees, the posters and demonstration chairs;
Omar Alonso and Giambattista Amati the workshop chairs; Djoerd Hiemstra the tutorials chair; Douglas W.
Oard and Paul Thomas, managed the doctoral consortium; Norbert Fuhr chaired the best paper award
committee; Ian Ruthven coordinated the mentoring program; and David Harper and Peter Schäuble for
organizing the industry day. We also thank the SIGIR Executive for their guidance throughout this process.
The contributions in these proceedings represent a diverse and comprehensive coverage of IR research. The
selection of quality contributions for the SIGIR conference is dependent on a two tier double blind reviewing
process. We are indebted to the program committee comprising of 490 reviewers and 40 senior program
committee (SPCs) members. Each reviewer was assigned up to 6 papers by the PC chairs and the SPCs in
accordance to reviewers’ stated subject expertise and each paper was allocated three reviewers. In cases
where there was a wide range of scores or incomplete information, several primary reviewers helped us out
with a number of additional reviews. The role of the SPCs was to oversee the process for their topic area, by
resolving disagreements between reviewers and producing a meta review for each paper drawn from the
primary reviews. The meta reviews served as the basis of discussion at the online Programme Committee
meeting. Most area coordinators were responsible for 15 or more papers / meta reviews. SPCs were selected
for their subject expertise in the different topic areas and attention was also paid to geographic representation
and PC Committee experience. All the reviewing was double blind with the identity of authors being released
only after the selection of papers was completed. The overall effort involved more than 2185 people as
authors, reviewers, SPCs, and chairs. The volume of papers this year stressed the limits of everyone’s time
and we are grateful to the reviewers for their efforts to get reviews in on time, and to the SPCs for leading
discussions, creating meta-reviews, and participating both virtually and in person at the online PC meeting.
We are also thankful to Thomas Preuss for his support and responsiveness, which has ensured that the
ConfMaster reviewing system run smoothly throughout the entire reviewing process. Finally, we
acknowledge, and are inspired by, the commitment and fervent engagement of our research community
towards the success of SIGIR.

Hsin-Hsi Chen

Efthimis N. Efthimiadis

Jacques Savoy

National Taiwan University
Asia & Pacific

University of Washington
Americas

University of Neuchatel
Africa & Europe

iv

