SGT Framework: Social, Geographical and Temporal
Relevance for Recreational Queries in Web Search
Stewart Whiting

Omar Alonso

School of Computing Science,
University of Glasgow,
Scotland, UK.

Microsoft Corp.
Mountain View,
California, USA.

stewh@dcs.gla.ac.uk

omalonso@microsoft.com

ABSTRACT
While location-based social networks (LBSNs) have become
widely used for sharing and consuming location information, a
large number of users turn to general web search engines for recreational activity ideas. In these cases, users typically express a query
combining desired activity type, constraints and suitability, around
an explicit location and time – for example, “parks for kids in NYC
in winter”, or “cheap bars for bachelor party in san francisco”. In
this work we characterize such queries as recreational queries, and
propose a relevance framework for ranking points of interest (POIs)
to present in the web search recreational vertical using signals from
query logs and LBSNs. The first part of this framework is a taxonomy of recreational intents, which we derive from those previously
seen in query logs and other behavioral data. Based on the most
popular recreational intents, we proceed to outline a new relevance
model combining social, geographical and temporal information.
We implement a prototype and conduct a preliminary user-study
evaluation. Results show the proposed relevance model and bundles greatly improve user satisfaction for recreational queries.

1.

Figure 1: Recreational queries for “things to do in san
francisco...” in the Bing query auto-suggest feature.
may comprise implicit and explicit expectations – such as what they
want and when they want to do it (e.g., season, weekday/weekend,
time of date, etc.), in addition to constraints and preferences such as
being ‘outside’, ‘cheap’, ‘romantic’, or ‘with kids’, etc. As a result,
the activity vertical POIs are often not relevant, so the user must
resort to collectively reviewing the web search results for ideas.
To address this issue, we aim to present to the user a number of
suggestions – based on LBSN check-in and tip data – that summarize the activities relevant to their intent. Note that this scenario is
distinguished from established venue recommendation techniques
employed by LBSNs since we have no previous venue ratings provided. Hence, only the user’s explicitly provided query and implicit
context (e.g., their geo-location, or the current time) can be used to
infer the user’s intent and expectations in the relevance model.
In this paper we present SGT, a framework that combines social, geographical and temporal information for presenting results
that address the user’s explicit (i.e., query-specified) and implicit
(i.e., assumed) search intent. A central part of our framework is a
taxonomy that drives the modeling and user experience.
We are interested in connecting the relevant information provided by two, potentially, different crowds - the users who are looking for things to do in search engine, and the users who have performed an activity in a LBSN like Facebook or Foursquare. The
goal is to use the data from LBSN to satisfy the user search query.
To achieve this, we would like to understand the different types of
recreational intents and queries and other user behavior, model the
relevance of venues to different queries, combine them in bundles,
and finally present the results to the user.
With this in mind, in this preliminary work we set out to answer
the following three research questions: (1) What type of recreational queries are users issuing to a search engine, and what is
their prevalence? (2) Can a retrieval model be built to offer relevant places for recreational queries, based on LBSN data? (3) Is
a single linear list of relevant venues, or a set of intent-oriented
bundles more effective for presenting results to users?
In answering these questions, we make the following contributions: (i) a taxonomy of common recreational queries, (ii) a relevance model incorporating LBSN data, (iii) an approach to generating result bundles for composing the results, and finally (iv)
preliminary evaluation using a large-scale real-world data set.

INTRODUCTION

LBSNs provide a platform for sharing and consuming local information during our every day lives through location check-ins
and tips. When considered collectively, this user-generated information is very useful for understanding user mobility and preference at unprecedented scale.
Location is an essential part of web search, where a major percentage of queries have an explicit or implicit location intent [7, 8].
In this work, we focus on a specific segment of queries that have
a recreational intent with a geographic preference. As an example,
say that a family is planning an upcoming weekend city trip, and
so are seeking suitable activity ideas. A query such as “things
to do in london with kids” will trigger the recreational vertical to provide a short list of the most popular generic POIs such as
tourist attractions and sightseeing spots. Real recreational queries
are shown in Figure 1.
However, the recreational activity vertical does not contain specific suggestions tailored to the user’s recreational intents, which
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.

SIGIR ’16, July 17-21, 2016, Pisa, Italy
c 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2914743

1001

2.

RELATED WORK

breakfast, lunch, dinner or late night snacks. Similarly, it is unlikely
a user will visit a park on a Sunday night in a cold city.
Time periods include seasons, months, weekday/weekends, day
of the week and the time of day (e.g., morning, afternoon, evening
and night). Alternatively, events such as Christmas, New Year,
Thanksgiving and Memorial Day, etc., can be translated into an
upcoming time anchor. Relative temporal constraints can be provided in the form of “now”, “today”, “tonight” and “this weekend”
etc., can also be translated into temporal constraints. In this work
we do not consider current or upcoming POI trendiness in ranking.
Activity Preference. Of course, many users will have a preference for the recreational activity they are seeking. They may
wish to eat or drink, whether at a restaurant or in a lively outdoor
area. Tourists are likely to want sightseeing areas and major POIs,
in contrast to residents who may prefer cafes and parks to relax.
Similarly, those looking for outdoor recreational activities will find
parks and trails much more relevant.
Activity Suitability. In many cases, user’s seek activities with
certain characteristics to match an activity purpose. For instance,
couples may wish to find a location that is romantic and therefore
suitable for a date or anniversary. This could be a restaurant, or
something to do, such as visiting a romantic sightseeing spot.
For different age groups, users may look for locations which
are suitable for kids, such as babies, toddlers, teenagers, etc.
Social group suitability may include friends, family and bachelor/bachelorette parties. Weather may also be a major factor in
some locations and seasons.
Activity Constraint.
Especially common are preferences
for “free”, “cheap”, “unique” and “educational” activities. For
nightlife recreational queries we often saw “lively” constraints, and
likewise the “quiet” constraint for bars, cafes and restaurants where
the objective was likely work-related. Disabled access and dogfriendly constraints were also commonly seen.
Together, these SGT taxonomy aspects can be used to represent complex recreational intents expressed in recreational queries,
such as “unique romantic things to do this weekend in
new york”.

The majority of work on LBSN data has concentrated on building context-aware venue recommender systems, where the context
is typically the user’s past preferences (expressed through checkins) and any explicitly requested venue requirements and filtering.
Because of the recent popularity of recommender systems, several evaluation tasks for optimising such systems have originated
in the community. The recent TREC Contextual Suggestion (CS)
Track [4] provided user rating data and user queries accompanied
with context such as query submission time. While the recreational
search scenario we outline in this paper has many similarities to this
TREC CS task, we do not have past user preferences to consider in
the POI relevance model since the majority of web search users are
either anonymous, or do not frequently use an LBSN.
There has been considerable analysis of the social, geographical and temporal patterns and trends present in LBSN data from
many perspectives. Check-ins have been found to contain many
structural patterns, caused by geographic and social constraints of
user’s lives [3] – which must be incorporated into any relevance
framework. Likewise, the preference for different activity types
changes dramatically (e.g., going to the movie theatre on a Friday
evening, versus going to the park in the morning at a weekend) [1].
Further, [5] models how check-in preferences change over different
periods time – from hour-to-hour through to seasons of the year. In
essence, in this work we integrate these findings in a retrieval model
specifically for supporting recreational search in web search.

3.

RECREATIONAL QUERY TAXONOMY

In this section, we present and discuss the SGT recreational
query taxonomy as a structure of the constraints and preferences
most commonly expressed in queries by users during recreational
information seeking.
We study common recreational query patterns observed in a variety of user-generated content and behavioral logs. In particular, we
mined a month of web and mobile search query logs and browser
behavioral data from the Microsoft Bing search engine. In each
source we looked for queries and links which contained to the substring seed text “things to”, “places to” and “what to”, and a city
recognised by a disambiguating location entity tagger. Note we find
the typical nature and expectations of recreational activity varies
considerably from place to place, for instance, “romantic” queries
are much more popular in Paris than in Chicago. In the following
sections we elaborate the top-level taxonomy aspects.

3.1

3.2

Query Classification & Aspect Popularity

For each taxonomy aspect we create a classifier incorporating
related terms and phrases. We use this to classify and map user
query and POI tip text (from the LBSN) to the aspects which they
relate in the taxonomy. The query or tip keywords present to identify each aspect are intuitive, so we do not list them exhaustively
here. For instance, the synonyms “for kids” or “for children” and
“kid-friendly” are used for the “kids” age suitability aspect.
Since tips and queries are short text, term frequency is usually
1 so a simple binary term presence classifier is effective. Future
work will explore more elaborate probabilistic and natural language
classifiers which can better handle positive and negative sentiments
expressed in more complex phrases, such as ‘not good for kids’and
‘my kids loved this place’ in tip text.
Taxonomy Aspect Popularity in Search Queries. With a longtail distribution typical in search, we found the ten most common
recreational aspects expressed in queries were for: (1) tourism, (2)
eating, (3) fun, (4) for kids, (5) weekend, (6) near, (7) free, (8)
outside, (9) with dog, and (10) birthday. Notably, we found the
popularity of these aspects varies hugely between cities, and for
the same city at different times. Accordingly, we propose activity
bundles to better support this behaviour in Section 5. Based on this
taxonomy, in the next section we outline the SGT relevance model
to rank POIs for recreational queries.

Taxonomy Aspects

The taxonomy comprises the following high-level aspects: (i)
geographical constraint, (ii) temporal constraint, (iii) activity preference, (iv) activity suitability, and (v) activity constraint.
Each aspect corresponds to the recreational activity requirements
expressed in real user queries. In many cases the aspects are not independent, with a single query often containing many aspects (e.g.,
‘cheap things to do with kids in nyc in january’). In
the following subsections we describe each aspect along with illustrative query examples from a real query log.
Geographical Constraint. Most important is the place where
the user is, or alternatively, is going. Locations expressed by a user
include a country, state or city. City names must be disambiguated
using established techniques [6]. Relative locations such as ‘near’
and ‘around’ must be resolved relative to specific location. In our
experiments reported in Section 6, we use major world cities as the
base geographical constraint.
Temporal Constraint. Time will define relevant POIs [3, 5,
1]. For example, eating will differ during the day as people desire

1002

4.

MODELLING POI RELEVANCE

fun, children and dogs. For the most popular POIs in major cities,
this technique alone helps us quantify the relevance of the POI for
the most common taxonomy aspects. However, the sparsity of tips
for the majority of individual POIs and smaller cities means this
approach quickly becomes ineffective.
To overcome this sparsity issue (especially for the long-tail) we
rely on higher-level POI categories (e.g., “bowling alley”, “playground”, “zoo”, “theme bar” and “beach”, etc.) to determine the
appropriateness of a POI to a given aspect via its category. This
approach allows use to still present and effectively rank POIs with
few or no tips relating to a given taxonomy aspect.
With this in mind, we organise aspect classified POI tips by their
respective POI category – rather than their particular POI. From
this, we compute a score that each POI category is relevant to each
SGT taxonomy aspect. Henceforth, for each taxonomy aspect ai ,
and POI category ci we compute the category relevance score as:

We extract a list of POIs for each major world city from LBSN
data, and model various signals from the social data to quantify
each location’s relevance to a recreational query. For LBSN data,
we use the full 2014 check-in and POI tip datasets from the popular
Foursquare and Facebook LBSNs (a combined total of over 1B+
check-ins, with a considerable number including textual tips).
Check-in times tell us when places are popular. Likewise, tips
tell us what people think about POIs, offering several clues such as
whether they are good for kids, a romantic date, lively, or quiet etc.
All these signals must be combined to filter and rank relevant POIs
for queries spanning multiple aspects of our taxonomy.
In this work we use a very large dataset of LBSN data, and as we
are most interested in major world cities with plenty of check-in
data available (hence, sparsity is not a problem), at this stage we
employ a basic maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) model to
rank POIs based on the probability that the taxonomy aspects inferred from check-in and tip signals match the taxonomy-classified
recreational query aspects. Accordingly, for a given recreational
query qrec relating to a specified city, we compute and rank the
likelihood of a POI poii being relevant using the base MLE ranking formula as follows:
MLE(qrec ) = arg maxP(poii |qt , qa )

categoryrelevance(ai , ci ) =

(1)

poic is set of all POIs in the desired city (future work will explore
more fine-grained locations). qt is the likelihood of the POI being
relevant given any temporal activity constraints expressed in the
recreational query. And finally, qa is the POI relevance to any given
SGT taxonomy aspects expressed in the recreational query. We
elaborate on deriving the temporal and taxonomy aspect popularity
components in the following two sections.

Temporal Ranking Component

From past check-ins, we observe the probability that a
user will check-in at the POI during any given time period.
We consider all permutations for parts of the day (morning/afternoon/evening/night), day of the week (Monday-Sunday),
weekdays/weekends and season, similar to that presented in [5].
Thus, in the base MLE ranking equation (Equation 1), we define
the temporal relevance qt of poii probabilistically as P(poii |qt ) =
P(poii |City, PartO f Day, DayO fWeek,WeekdayWeekend, Season).
Recent trends such as new and trending POIs will not be observed in past data. We leave time series modelling to capture these
more elaborate temporal trends to future work.

4.2

(2)

Where f req(ai , ci ) is the number of tips from the POI category ci
classified with the given aspect, and f req(ai ) is the number of tips
from any POI category classified with the given aspect. The final
log term provides down-scaling for the overall most popular categories (e.g., bars), which tend to appear indiscriminately in all
aspects, allowing more specific – yet, highly relevant – niche categories to rank highly.
The result of this scoring function provides intuitive ranking of
categories for each taxonomy aspect. For example, this function
ranks the POI categories “mini golf”, “paintball field”, “theme park
ride”, “go kart track” and “theme park” highest for the “fun” taxonomy aspect. Likewise, it ranks “playground”, “science museum”,
“toy/game store”, “theme park” and “zoo” as top for the “kids”
taxonomy aspect.
To define aspect relevance for a POI to a recreational query,
we combine POI-specific, if available, and POI category evidence
together. Thus, we define the aspect relevance qa for poii as
aspectrelevance(poii , qa ) = (1 + P(qa |poii ) ×
(categoryrelevance(qi , poicategory )) . P(qa |poii ) is the probability
that the POI poii has a tip classified with the query aspect qa . The
preceding 1 + . . . term is to smooth zero probabilities. Hence, in
this model the POI-specific term can be seen as a boost for the typically more much more powerful POI category score term.

poii ∈poic

4.1

f req(ai , ci )
×log10 ( f req(ai ))
f req(ai )

5.

RESULT BUNDLES

Finally, we consider how to effectively present POI results to
the user. When the user provides an ambiguous recreational query
without any specific activity constraints, preferences or suitability (e.g., just “things to do in london”), we posit their need is exploratory – and so a more organised and diversified result presentation is required (as has been applied in web search scenarios [2]).
Accordingly, we propose a simple POI result-bundling approach by
activity aspect to maximise user understanding of all POI options,
and thus overall satisfaction.
The prevailing approach used in the web search activity vertical
is to simply present the top-k most relevant POIs in a linear list (accompanied by thumbnail) – as illustrated by (1) in Figure 2. This
approach is limited since it offers unintuitive organisation of POI
results, and little diversity. Hence, we look to group a small number of taxonomy aspect-related (e.g., “for kids”, or “nightlife” etc.)
POI results into bundles to present – illustrated by (2) in Figure 2.
Each bundle corresponds to set of most popular aspects we have
observed for the city (or, from all cities in aggregate if no such ob-

Aspect Ranking Component

To rank POIs for recreational queries, we must quantify the relevance of every POI to each aspect in the SGT taxonomy. We do this
by examining the feedback in LBSN POI tips to determine which
of those POIs, and POI categories, are most likely to satisfy a recreational query based. In essence, this means we higher rank POIs for
a romantic recreational query when the POI is both in a typically
romantic category (e.g., sightseeing spots, or French restaurants),
and has tips mentioning that it is itself romantic.
Using the same keyword classifier detailed in Section 3.2, we
classify all the POI tips into our taxonomy aspects. For example, the tip: “my kids loved the great food here - and
it was cheap” would be classified with the aspects: “for kids”,
“cheap” and “great”. In the first instance, this allows us to observe
which local POIs have a propensity towards certain taxonomy aspects, based solely on their own tips. For example, major city parks
with good play areas and open space have many tips mentioning

1003

Evaluation
5

5

4.10
4

3.38

3.42

3.97
4

3.58

3.05

3

3

2

2

1

1

0

0
System 1 - for System 1 - for a System 2 - for System 2 - for a
you
tourist
you
tourist

Figure 2: (1) linear list-based POI result presentation, and (2)
bundle-based POI result list presentation.

3.92

3.10

Evaluation

System 1 - for System 1 - for a System 2 - for System 2 - for a
you
tourist
you
tourist

Figure 3: Average system rating for a city the user is familiar
with, but does not live in (i.e., task 1).
5

6.

4

3.38

3.42

3.58

4

3.05

3

3

2

2

1

1

0

System 1 - for System 1
you
tour

Figure 4: Average system rating for a city the user lives in, or
near (i.e., task 2).

8.

CONCLUSION

In this work, we investigated POI result ranking and presentation
for the large number of recreational search queries posed to a web
search engine. We outlined the Social, Geographical and Temporal
(SGT) Framework as a first step for modelling POI relevance in this
scenario. Further, recognising the issues of presenting POI results
in a linear list in the activity search vertical, we proposed a POI
result bundling to improve the user comprehension of results.
With respect to the research questions outlined in Section 1, we
make several findings. A wide range of broand and specific recreational queries are posed to web search engines. We constructed
a taxonomy of these, and report a long-tail frequency distribution.
We outlined the SGT framework for modelling POI relevance based
on the LBSN tip and check-in data. Preliminary evaluation indicated this first approach satisfied users. Finally, we found bundlebased result presentation is much preferred for familiar and tourist
user scenarios. This work represents a first step; future work will
better address city POI information sparsity, user personalisation,
and bundling strategies along with more conclusive evaluation.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE

9.

REFERENCES

[1] S. Bannur and O. Alonso. Analyzing temporal characteristics of
check-in data. In WWW ’14, pages 827–832.
[2] H. Bota, K. Zhou, J. M. Jose, and M. Lalmas. Composite retrieval of
heterogeneous web search. In WWW ’14, pages 119–130.
[3] E. Cho, S. A. Myers, and J. Leskovec. Friendship and mobility: user
movement in location-based social networks. In SIGKDD ’11, pages
1082–1090. ACM.
[4] A. Dean-Hall, C. L. Clarke, J. Kamps, P. Thomas, N. Simone, and
E. Voorhees. Overview of the trec 2013 contextual suggestion track. In
TREC 2013.
[5] H. Gao, J. Tang, X. Hu, and H. Liu. Modeling temporal effects of
human mobile behavior on location-based social networks. In CIKM
’13, pages 1673–1678.
[6] C. B. Jones and R. S. Purves. Geographical information retrieval.
International Journal of Geographical Information Science,
22(3):219–228, 2008.
[7] M. Sanderson and J. Kohler. Analyzing geographic queries. In
Workshop on Geographic Information Retrieval, SIGIR ’04.
[8] L. Wang, C. Wang, X. Xie, J. Forman, Y. Lu, W.-Y. Ma, and Y. Li.
Detecting dominant locations from search queries. In SIGIR ’05.

RESULTS & DISCUSSION

Overall, questionnaire results presented in Figures 3 and 4 show
that users in general like the POI results provided by the SGT
framework for their recreational queries. In particular, we find that
users much prefer bundle-based result presentation, especially for
familiar cities – this is probably because they surface more unusual
options beyond the typical top well-known POIs. We also note
that they feel that tourists could benefit from them, demonstrating
the potential for both major recreational query use cases. We note
qualitative feedback which suggested we needed to introduce interaction to allow the user to specify the bundles they were presented.

1004

3.1

0
System 1 - for System 1 - for a System 2 - for System 2 - for a
you
tourist
you
tourist

We conducted a small user experiment to evaluate the effectiveness of the SGT framework for ranking POIs, and the presentation
of POI results in linear lists versus bundles. 10 users were (5 males
and 5 females, 20-40 years of age) with extensive web search experience. Participants were from 6 different countries, so tested the
system for a wide range of major international cities.
After a brief training session, participants were asked to interact
with two systems, and answer the same set of two questions for
two tasks. System 1 is the linear list-based POI results, and System
2 is bundle-based POI presentation. The tasks and questions were
as follows. Task 1: Choose a city you are very familiar with, but
do not live in. This might be the city in which you grew up or
attended school. Task 2: What is the major city you currently live
in, or near? For each system, please type the name of the city and
search for things to do. Based on your experiences, please answer
the following questions: (Q1) Based your knowledge of the city,
on a scale 1 to 5 (1=bad, 5=excellent), what is the quality of the
POI suggestions? (Q2) On a scale 1 to 5 (1=bad, 5=excellent), how
useful is this information for a user who is not familiar with your
city but is looking for things to do?

7.

5

4.10

servation is available, as is the case for smaller cities). These are
the aspects we discussed in Section 3.2. Recall how we noted the
aspect popularity varied from city-to-city, and indeed over time.
For instance, Paris had far more recreational queries relating to romantic aspects. Likewise, for Santa Cruz (CA), recreational queries
mainly related to beach, outdoor and leisure aspects were most popular, especially in summer.
For each city, we extracted the four most popular aspects as candidate result bundle aspects. As per the linear list, we rank the
POIs using the SGT Framework presented in the previous section.
However, we interleave the results into each bundle by selecting
the top-k POI results by their category and relevance to the bundle
taxonomy aspect. This means for San Francisco, one such bundle is “with kids” – so we present a bundle with a combination of
top ranking POIs in the “playground”, “science museum”, “zoo”,
“theme park” and so forth categories.

