Understanding Information Need: an fMRI Study
Yashar Moshfeghi

Peter Triantafillou

Frank E. Pollick

School of Computing Science
University of Glasgow
Glasgow, UK

School of Computing Science
University of Glasgow
Glasgow, UK

School of Psychology
University of Glasgow
Glasgow, UK

Yashar.Moshfeghi@
glasgow.ac.uk

Peter.Triantafillou@
glasgow.ac.uk

Frank.Pollick@
glasgow.ac.uk

information retrieval and other relevant scientific communities. As a result of such research, seminal theories, models,
and findings have been published, shaping the foundations
of current IR systems. A few examples of such influential
works are Wilson’s Information Seeking Behaviour model
[46], Kuhlthau’s Information Seeking Process (ISP) model
[28], Ingwersen’s Cognitive IR Theory [21], and Belkin’s
Anomalous States of Knowledge (ASK) model [8]. These
works are mainly based on behavioural studies of searchers
while they engaged in an Information Retrieval and Seeking process, mainly through questionnaires/interviews [28],
or by observing and studying searchers interaction with IR
systems via their submitted queries and their reformulation
[26], or via their interaction with retrieved results [44]. Despite their invaluable contributions, they have all investigated the phenomenon of IN indirectly, via some sort of
mediator. Therefore, important research questions remain
unanswered, such as:

ABSTRACT
The raison d’etre of IR is to satisfy human information need.
But, do we really understand information need? Despite
advances in the past few decades in both the IR and relevant scientific communities, this question is largely unanswered. We do not really understand how an information
need emerges and how it is physically manifested. Information need refers to a complex concept: at the very initial
state of the phenomenon (i.e. at a visceral level), even the
searcher may not be aware of its existence. This renders
the measuring of this concept (using traditional behaviour
studies) nearly impossible. In this paper, we investigate the
connection between an information need and brain activity. Using functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI),
we measured the brain activity of twenty four participants
while they performed a Question Answering (Q/A) Task,
where the questions were carefully selected and developed
from TREC-8 and TREC 2001 Q/A Track. The results
of this experiment revealed a distributed network of brain
regions commonly associated with activities related to information need and retrieval and differing brain activity in
processing scenarios when participants knew the answer to a
given question and when they did not and needed to search.
We believe our study and conclusions constitute an important step in unravelling the nature of information need and
therefore better satisfying it.

• RQ1: “What is the nature of IN from a neuropsycology perspective?”;
• RQ2: “Is there a clear, detectable, physical manifestation (i.e. neural correlate) of IN in human brains?”;
• RQ3: “Can such manifestations be identified in an
early stage of an information seeking and retrieval process?”; and

Keywords: Anomalous States of Knowledge, Information Need, Information Retrieval, fMRI Study

1.

• RQ4: “Do such manifestations differ when an anomaly
in the user’s state of knowledge has been experienced?
i.e., when searchers choose not to engage in a search
process (Don’t know – Don’t search Scenario), compared to a scenario where they engage in a search process (Don’t know – Do Search Scenario)?”.

INTRODUCTION

The main goal of Information Retrieval (IR) systems is to
satisfy searchers’ information need (IN). Given the core and
fundamental role IN plays in an information seeking and retrieval process, over the last several decades much research
has been dedicated to better understand this concept in both

An answer to these questions will definitely improve our
understanding and lead to robust definitions of the IN concept. And, fundamentally, it will play a key role in opening
new doors to the design and implementations of novel IR
techniques which will be enabled to better (and even proactively) satisfy searchers’ need. The research described in this
paper represents our efforts towards this direction. In particular, in this paper we focus on discovering and mapping
the brain mechanisms of IN realisation, within an information retrieval process performed by humans engaged in a
Question Answering (Q/A) retrieval task. Our central aims
are to identify: (i) the brain regions associated with an IN
realisation (in its earliest state) and (ii) contrast the scenarios where individuals engage in search or simply state the

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).

SIGIR ’16, July 17–21, 2016, Pisa, Italy.
c 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07..
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2911534

335

need to search. We are focusing on the time period in which
the brain exhibits the highest activity with regards to the
process of IN realisation, from the moment of observing a
question, i.e. recognising an ASK. The identification of the
brain regions involved in an IN realisation (in particular in
an early state) and observing the period of time in which
there is a clear association of the activation of brain regions
where there exists an Information Need, can be the basis to
detect an IN in a Q/A task.
Our experiments rely on measuring Blood Oxygenation
Level Dependent (BOLD) signals and the fact that BOLD
signals can be analysed to detect significant brain activities
in the process of realising an IN in a Q/A task. In particular, we aim to identify the time frame in which significant
activity appears in users’ brains, while they are realising
an IN. In this spirit, this paper reports the results of an
fMRI based user study on Q/A search. In particular, we
have monitored, by an MRI device, the brain activities of
twenty four participants engaged in a Q/A search task for a
predefined set of questions with respect to a predefined set
of relevant and non-relevant documents. In order to do so,
we devised an experiment consisting of collecting data via
a 3T MRI scanner in a lab-based user study, and analysed
the collected data off-line. Our hypothesis is that there are
brain regions in which the BOLD signals would be different for No-IN scenarios (i.e., ”know the answer”) versus IN
scenarios (i.e., ”don’t know an answer and need to search”).
Moreover, this difference would be sensitive to whether individuals engage in search or simply state the need to search.
The remainder of the paper is organised as follows: Section 2 presents related work and the background. Section 3
discusses at length the experimental methodology. Section 4
presents and analyses our results. Finally, Section 5 presents
our key conclusions.

2.

because the formulated query is not guaranteed to provide
an exact description required to retrieve the relevant documents [45]. In other words, expressing an IN using a set
of query keywords is considered to be uncertain and noisy
[41], as it can only vaguely approximate the actual IN [40].
The problem becomes even more pronounced when an IN is
ill-defined : i.e., when the searcher only knows “fringes of a
gap in [his/her] knowledge” [12] making it extremely difficult for the searcher to identify and describe the IN [7, 8,
11]. Therefore, it is possible that a given query may not sufficiently define the characteristics of relevant documents, or
even any relevant information, since a searcher cannot form
an appropriate initial state from which to form a query [13].
Taylor’s [40] classic four-level theory of IN theorised the
complex nature of IN as follows: (i) a search begins with a
process based on an area of doubt or a gap in understanding,
which is a compromised expression of the need (Taylor calls
this the Q4 level). The searcher, as a result of searching,
can subsequently frame an IN, borrowing generic knowledge
frames from adjacent areas in memory; at a certain point,
a transformational event of information use leads to the IN
being actualised, resulting in the information search becoming focused. This transformation in the use of information
causes the searcher’s Q4 compromised level of need to access deeper levels of the need, i.e. the formal expression
of the need (Taylor calls this the Q3 level), the conscious
“within brain” description of the need (Taylor calls this the
Q2 level) and finally the deepest level of the need is the
“visceral” (i.e., instinctual) level (Taylor calls the Q1 level)
[40, 12]. What is of particular interest to the current paper are the lower levels in Taylor’s conceptualisation of IN,
namely the unconscious, visceral information need (which
the user cannot know and therefore cannot specify to the
IR system) leading to the ”within brain” description of the
IN. Ingwersen [21] in his Cognitive theory of IR explains
that, based on the perspective of cognitive science, theories
of information and empirical evidence, an appropriate approach to understanding IR is first to examine the mental
formation of the information need and use this as the starting point for IR interaction. This formulation is a central
issue in IR. This paper takes substantial motivation from
this vein of research, arguing that IR systems that can detect and understand INs, starting from their Q1 levels, can
better satisfy them.

RELATED WORK

2.1 IN Complexity and the IN-Query Gap
IN is an essential concept and at the core of the information retrieval processes. When searchers realise an information need, they experience an anomaly in their current
state of knowledge (ASK) [8]. As a result, search processes
are initiated: Searchers transform their IN into a query and
submit it to an IR system. In turn, the IR system retrieves
potentially relevant documents, aiming to satisfy the IN.
Subsequently, searchers evaluate retrieved documents, accumulating relevant information which leads them to satisfy
their IN. Often, however, searchers are not satisfied with
the results obtained in response to their initial query formulation [42], and thus must engage in further interaction with
the system to resolve their need. Therein lies the complexity
associated with the concept of IN.
The complexity of IN rests in its paradoxical nature [12]:
Unlike other primary human need (e.g., physiological ones),
it is often unknown to the individual beforehand what information is required to satisfy the IN. Research indicates that
this is because an IN is “intangible and visceral” and therefore “unknowable and non-specifiable” – thus, how can one
express an IN using a query to an IR system? [8, 12] Hence,
the very nature of IN inherently makes it nearly impossible
for searchers to correctly map their IN to a IR query [8,
9, 20, 12, 40]. This produces a gap between how an IN is
represented (i.e. the formulated query) and the actual IN,

2.2 Closing the IN-Query Gap
Typically, IR systems rely on a progressive disambiguation of the user’s information need through an interactive
and iterative process known as the relevance feedback cycle.
Relevance feedback is central to the IR system’s efforts to
construct a better representation of the users’ IN. Relevance
feedback may be gathered through explicit [27], implicit [43],
and/or affective feedback [2]. Explicit feedback is viewed as
a robust method to improve retrieval effectiveness [27]. However, it is not always applicable due to the cognitive burden
that it places on users [44]. Enter implicit feedback, in which
relevance is inferred from the interactional data in an indirect and unobtrusive manner [22]. For example, researchers
try to understand how task [43], dwell time [25] and clickthrough [22] relate to relevance. However, a problem occurs
when actions are taken as an indication of relevance without
sufficient evidence to support their effectiveness [36]. For example, Kelly and Belkin [24] show that the implicit feedback

336

measures based on user interaction with the full content of
documents can often be unreliable, and difficult to measure
or interpret. Recently, affective feedback has been proposed
[2] which relies on capturing facial expression [5], eye tracking [30], and physiological signals [3, 33] (such as skin temperature) and uses them as implicit relevance judgements.
However, these methods can only help researchers to understand the concept of relevance to a certain level and are
not considered to be very effective. Implicit feedback IR
systems, albeit noisy, can collect several distinct signals of
the user’s interests through the analysis of both user’s actions and user generated contents [44]. Recently, affective
and physiological features have been considered as a valid
ground to define implicit feedback techniques [2, 35, 33].
For example, Arapakis et al., studied the role of emotions
in information retrieval, and introduced a number of models
[2, 4]. In their subsequent work, the authors have shown
that emotional features can be effectively included in building implicit feedback systems [4], and they can also be used
to personalise search [2]. Similarly, the work by Moshfeghi
et al. demonstrated that, in addition to emotional features
[34], physiological features can also be used to model relevance and they can also be used to predict task types [33].

ity during periods in which an information need was induced.
In particular, we implemented two different scenarios to create information need, in both scenarios participants were
asked a multiple choice question, but in the first scenario
when participants confronted an ASK they only had the option to acknowledge that they needed to search, they could
not act on this IN. In the second scenario when participants
confronted an ASK they were able to engage in a search
process. Our hypothesis was that there exists brain regions
for which the activation levels are different depending on
the state of information need and that the regions found
for these two scenarios would provide measurement data of
brain states to complement our theoretical understanding of
IN.
Related to our hypotheses there are several considerations on the design and analysis of fMRI data [35, 14]. Of
particular importance are several factors that were critical
in guiding our research plans. Firstly, the fMRI scanning
environment is restrictive in that a participant must lay
supine with their head kept still, and that only limited response/interactive devices can be in this scanning environment without causing signal or safety issues. This constraint
led to the use of multiple choice questions for a task since it
was possible to provide response using an MRI-compatible
button box. Another constraint is that while fMRI provides the ability to localise activity to within millimetres,
the temporal resolution of fMRI ( the time to take a single
measurement of the entire brain) is on the order of around
2 seconds. This relatively slow rate of data acquisition is
compounded by the fact that the Blood Oxygenation Level
Dependent (BOLD) signal measured is related to the underlying neural signal in a complex way that introduces further
delays [18]. To address these delays it was necessary to time
the events of the different scenarios at a rate that was compatible with our fMRI measurements. To achieve a suitable
design for our questions about IN we adapted the methods
used in related work in problem solving [47] which examined
neural correlates of insight by comparing brain activity when
a multiple choice response showed insight, to brain activity
when a multiple choice response did not show insight.

2.3 Neuropsychology and IR
Recent research has begun to examine IR from a neuroscience perspective, using techniques of brain imaging to
reveal the brain activity related to the underlying neural
activity of a user. One particular area of emphasis to this
research has been to examine the concept of relevance. Results of Moshfeghi et al. [35] showed, using fMRI, that it
is possible to identify brain regions activated by the process
of judging relevance of an image. The brain regions they
reported included the inferior parietal lobe, inferior temporal gyrus and superior frontal gyrus; the activation of these
regions during relevance assessment was significantly higher
when evaluating relevant items.
Another example is a study conducted by Eugster et al.
[17] that used EEG to show that the frequency content of
the EEG signal as well as Event Related Potentials (ERPs)
can be used effectively as a set of features to decode the
relevance of a text. Similarly, Allegretti et al. [1] reported on
EEG results that indicated that within 500 ms EEG signals
begin to appear that differentiate between viewing a relevant
and a non relevant image. Likewise, Kauppi et al. [23] used
magnetoencephalography (MEG) to show that the frequency
content of the MEG signal, along with eye movement data
can be used for decoding relevance of images. These studies
have used the relative strength of the different measurement
techniques to make great progress and to indicate where
in the brain relevance judgments are happening and what
the time course is of these neural processes that determine
relevance.
However, the above studies have not investigated the wider
view of how IN emerges. In this paper we take an important
step to understanding the neural processes involved with primary stages when an IN emerges.

3.

3.2 Design
A “within-subjects” design was used in this study. The
independent variable was the information need (with two
levels: information need, and no information need), which
was controlled by responding to questions viewed on the
screen. The set of questions were designed so that averaged
across all participants there would be an equal number of
responses expressing an answer and expressing a need for
search. The dependent variable was brain activity revealed
by the BOLD signal.

3.3 Task
Each participant completed two different search scenarios.
Question-Response (QR) Task: In the first scenario,
which we term Question-Response (QR), participants were
first presented with a question for 4 seconds, then for 4 seconds four possible responses were provided while the question stayed on the screen (Figure 1). Participants could not
make a response until after the 4 seconds of observing the
possible responses. This was done so that brain activity related to the motor response of pressing the button would
not be contained in the model of brain activity, which only

EXPERIMENTAL METHODOLOGY

3.1 Research Questions and Hypothesis
This paper studies the concept of information need from a
neuropsychological perspective by investigating brain activ-

337

removed the questions that were ambiguous or were time dependent, e.g. Who is the president of Stanford University?
(TREC-8, Topic 51), making the answers provided in the
Track not appropriate. The answers of all these questions
were then checked by current search engines to make sure
that the answers are still valid and correct. We also created two wrong answers for each question that were in the
domain of the question, e.g. ”What is supernova?” (TREC2001, Topic 1067) the correct answer is “An exploding star”
and we created two other wrong answers i.e. “A newborn
star” and “A dead star”. We also made sure that the questions covered a wide range of topics, e.g. history, politics,
science, etc. This was done in order to reduce any bias that
might occur from emphasis of a particular type of question.
Over this set of questions, two annotators separately judged
the difficulty of the questions (i.e. hard or easy) and then selected a subset of 80 questions where both annotators agreed
upon their difficulties, i.e. 40 of them were hard and 40
were easy questions. For Scenario 1, 40 questions out of
these 80 questions were selected where 20 were easy and 20
were hard questions. The remainder of the questions were
used for Scenario 2. Since Scenario 2 was divided into two
runs, additional care was made to further divide the questions across the runs so that they both had 10 easy and 10
hard questions covering a variety of topics. The goal of this
procedure was to control the set of questions such that on
average there was an equal chance of experiencing ASK and
knowing the answer.
Another extra step for Scenario 2 was to prepare the documents that were shown to the subjects once they engaged
in a search process. This took the form of simulating a snippet answer that is returned by current search engine such
as Google when a question is submitted. For this purpose
we selected two relevant and two non-relevant documents
from QRel. The length of the answers provided in TREC8 and TREC 2001 were incompatible. In order to keep the
size of the results consistent, for those answers that were too
short, we found the original source file and selected sentences
around the answer so that all snippets had the same length.
The average length of the answers shown to the participants
for first and second run of Scenario 2 were 39.47 words (SD
of 3.33) and 39.65 words (SD of 3.285) respectively. This was
done in order to reduce any potential confounding effect of
snippet size on the brain activity results.

considered these first 8 seconds. After the 8 seconds participants were able to respond and in this QR scenario the
experiment progressed directly on to the next trial. Of the
four possible responses, one was always the correct answer
and one of them was always “need to search”. The position
of the four alternatives was randomised for each trial and the
response given by pressing one of the four buttons available
on the button box that each participant had in their right
hand. The time to respond was left free so that participants
were not under time pressure to respond. The order of the
questions was randomised for each participant.

Figure 1:

A schematic representation of Scenario 1

Question-Response-Search (QRS) Task:
In the
second scenario, which we term Question-Response-Search
(QRS), participants performed the same task as in the QR
scenario except that if the answer ”need to search” was provided then they entered an additional stage where they formulated a search query (and submitted it verbally into a
noise-cancelling microphone), received a document and evaluated this document. In the present study we do not investigate brain activity during the search and document evaluation periods. Instead we focus only on the brain activity
in response to the the presentation of the question and the
possible responses. The difference between the two scenarios is that in Scenario 1 participants do not engage in a
search process, while in the second scenario they do engage
in a search process. This is important from the conceptual
stance that in Scenario 1 stating the need to search is the
endpoint of the entire process, while for Scenario 2 it is a
transition to the start of a search.

3.4 Question Answering Dataset
In order to perform the two task scenarios mentioned in
Section 3.3, we created a Question Answering dataset1 . To
develop this standard set of questions, we used previous runs
of TREC Q/A Track, in particular we carefully selected a set
of 80 questions from the TREC-8 and TREC-2001 Question
Answering Tracks - Main Task2 . We chose these two Tracks
since they were the first and last tracks where the questions
presented there were (i) independent from one another, in
contrast to other Tracks that share a relationship, and (ii)
they also provided the correct answer to the questions.
We then manually examined all the questions presented
in these two tracks and selected a subset of questions that
(i) were not longer than one line, and (ii) the correct answer to the question was not longer than 5 words. This
constraint is due to the limitation of presenting the questions and options to the participants in an fMRI settings.
An additional constraint was that there were at least two
relevant and non-relevant answers in their QRel. We then

3.5 Procedure
This section outlines the flow of the study, from beginning to end. Ethical permission for the study was obtained
from the Ethics Committee of the College of Science and
Engineering, University of Glasgow. Participants were recruited from the participant database at Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, University of Glasgow. Participants
were instructed of the duration of the experiment, which
included approximately 50 minutes to perform all tasks examining information need, and approximately 10 minutes to
obtain a scan of their anatomical structure. They were informed that they could leave at any point in time during the
experiment and would still receive payment (the payment
rate was £6/hr). They were then asked to sign a consent
form. Before participating, participants underwent a safety
check to guarantee that they did not possess any metal items
inside or outside of their body, or any other contraindications for scanning, such as certain tattoo inks. They were

1

The Question Answering dataset is available upon request.
For more information please visit http://trec.nist.gov/data/qa/
t8 qadata.html and http://trec.nist.gov/data/qa/2001 qadata/main
task.html
2

338

then provided with gear (similar to a training suit) to wear
for the duration of the experiment to avoid interference from
any metal objects in their clothes with the fMRI signal.
Next, as a training process they were given an example
task and a corresponding set of example questions in order
to familiarise themselves with the procedure. Once they had
successfully completed their training task, participants entered the fMRI machine and the experimenter adjusted the
settings of the machine to maximise their comfort and vision.
While being scanned, each participant first participated in
one run of the QR scenario, which contained 40 questions.
They then participated in two separate runs of the QRS scenario, with each run comprised of 20 questions. Two runs
were chosen to give the participants a further break to relax during the scanning and to prevent fatigue on the QRS
task, which consumed more time. After the functional runs
were complete the anatomical data of each participant was
obtained.
After completion of scanning participants were asked to fill
out an exit questionnaire that provided further demographic
and qualitative descriptions of their experience during the
experiment. They also filled out the Edinburgh handedness
questionnaire [37] which provides evaluation of whether the
participant was right-, left- or mixed-handed. Handedness
information was obtained since lateralization of brain function is influenced by handedness and we wished to ensure
that our sample of participants approximated the general
population.
Apparatus: The images were presented using Presentation R software3 , and projected using a LCD projector
onto a translucent screen, while participants watched them
in an angled mirror in the MRI scanner.
fMRI Data Acquisition: All fMRI data was collected
using a 3T Tim Trio Siemens scanner and 32-channel head
coil at the Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, University of
Glasgow. A functional T2*-weighted MRI run was acquired
for the single run of the QR scenario and the two runs of
the QRS scenario (TR 2000ms; TE 30ms; 32 Slices; 3mm3
voxel; FOV of 210, imaging matrix of 70 × 70).
An anatomical scan was performed at the end of the scanning session that comprised a high-resolution T1-weighted
anatomical scan using a 3D magnetisation prepared rapid
acquisition gradient echo (ADNI- MPRAGE) T1-weighted
sequence (192 slices; 1mm3 voxel; Sagittal Slice; TR =
1900ms; TE = 2.52; 256 × 256 image resolution).
Questionnaires:
At the end of the experiment, the
participants were introduced to an exit questionnaire, which
gathered background and demographic information. It also
enquired about previous experience with fMRI type user
studies as well as participants general comments for the user
study. Finally, it also included questions to ascertain participants’ subjective experience of performing the experiment.
Pilot Studies: Prior to running the actual user study, a
pilot study was performed using two participants to confirm
that the process worked correctly and smoothly. A number
of changes were made to the experimental paradigm based
on feedback from the pilot study. After the pilot, it was
determined that the participants were able to complete the
user study without problems and that the system was correctly logging participants’ interaction data.

4. RESULTS
A study with the procedure explained in Section 3.5 was
conducted over 15 days from 7 December, 2015 to 22 December, 2015. Participants consisted of 24 healthy individuals
with 11 males and 13 females. All participants were under
the age of 44, with the largest group between the ages of
18-23 (54.1%) followed by a group between the ages of 3035 (20.8%). The handedness survey indicated that 79.1%
were right-handed, 12.5% were left-handed and 8.33% were
mixed-handed. Participants tended to have a postgraduate
degree (20.8%), bachelors (33.33%) or other qualifications
(45.8%). They were primarily students (54.1%), though
there were a number of individuals who were self-employed
(20.8%), not employed (4.16%) or employed by a company
or organisation (20.8%). Participants were primarily native speakers (79.1%) or had an advanced level of English
(20.8%). They all had experience in searching, with an average of 11.66 years (SD of 3.58) experience.
Task Perception: At the end of the procedure an exit
questionnaire was performed that included questions about
participants’ overall subjective experience of performing the
tasks. These questions specifically addressed participants’
perception of their performed tasks in terms of the difficulty of the task, the familiarity of the participant with the
task and the extent to which they found the task stressful,
clear, successful, and satisfactory. Namely, participants were
given the following questions “The tasks we asked you to perform were [easy/stressful/familiar/clear/Satisfactory] (answer: 1: “Strongly Disagree”, 2: “Disagree”, 3: “Neutral”,
4: “Agree”, 5: “Strongly Agree”)”. Descriptive statistics of
these responses are shown by box plots in Figure 2, which
show five key statistics: the minimum, first, second (median), third, and maximum quartiles.4 . These results indicate that participants found the tasks difficult (not easy)
and stressful, familiar, clear, successful, and satisfactory.

3
1

2

Agreement Level

4

5

The tasks perfomed were

Easy

Stressful

Familiar

Clear

Successful Satisfactory

Figure 2:

Box plot of the task perception based on the information
gathered from the questionnaires of 24 participants. The red diamond
represents the mean value.

Log Analysis: The fMRI analysis for both Scenario 1
and Scenario 2 relied upon a participant’s response of the
question to code whether a trial was IN or No-IN. This raised
two considerations: firstly, for examination of brain data
within a scenario it is important to have approximately an
equal response rate for IN and No-IN responses. Secondly,
comparison across scenarios is strengthened by having similar response rates since this argues against the possibility

3

Presentation R software (Neurobehavioral systems, Inc.), http://
www.neurobs.com.

4

339

Further information can be found in [31].

that any difference found was due to simply response bias.
Thus, it was important to examine the average response
rates for whether the number of IN and No-IN responses
were approximately balanced for each scenario and whether
there was a difference between scenarios. In Scenario 1 the
average number of IN responses was 18.45 (SD of 4.59) and
the average number of No-IN responses was 21.42 (SD of
4.41). A paired t-test revealed that there was no difference
between the type of responses (p-value = 0.12). In Scenario
2 the average number of IN responses was 17.5 (SD of 5.91)
and the average number of No-IN responses was 22.5 (SD of
5.91). A paired t-test revealed a marginal difference between
the type of responses (p-value = 0.05). An examination of
the response rates across scenarios using paired t-tests revealed no significant difference between scenarios for either
IN responses (p-value = 0.24) or No-IN responses (p-value
= 0.19).
fMRI Data Preprocessing: The fMRI data were preprocessed using Brain Voyager QX5 . A standard pipeline of
pre-processing of the data was performed for each participant [19]. This involved slice scan time correction using trilinear interpolation based on information about the TR and
the order of slice scanning. Three-dimensional motion correction was performed to detect and correct for small head
movements by spatial alignment of all the volumes of a participant to the first volume by rigid body transformations.
In addition, linear trends in the data were removed and high
pass filtering with a cutoff of 0.0025 Hz performed to reduce
artefact from low frequency physiological noise. The functional data were then coregistered with the anatomic data
and spatially normalised into the common Talairach space
[39]. Finally, the functional data of each individual underwent spatial smoothing using a Gaussian kernel of 6mm to
facilitate analysis of group data.

with IN, our results point to a particular region of the brain
known as the posterior cingulate which is known to be a critical hub area involved in coordinating brain activity between
the internal and external environment.
Analysis of Scenario 1 (RQ): In Scenario 1 we investigated brain activity when participants were presented
with questions and possible responses, and they needed to
decide that they knew the answer already or would need
to search. For all participants we contrasted brain activity
when they provided an answer versus when they provided
the response that they needed to search. We hypothesised
that this contrast would reveal brain regions associated with
successful memory retrieval and working memory when they
responded with an answer, signifying No-IN. When the response was that there was a need to search we expected
activity in regions associated with IN.
The results, based on all 24 participants, for the effect
of the factor Type of Response are shown for Scenario 1 in
Figure 3 plotted on an average brain and in Table 1. To
evaluate whether the effect of the Type of Response indicated higher or lower activity when a search was requested
the average beta weights for each cluster were obtained and
these are presented in bar charts for each of the clusters. Results showed that 4 of the 5 clusters had higher activation
for the No-IN condition. This included thalamus, extending
into the left head of caudate, right head of caudate, the left
caudate body and an extensive cluster in the right inferior
frontal gyrus (also known as the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex). These regions are known to have anatomical connectivity [16] and have been implicated in processes of memory
retrieval [32], working memory [6], and decision making [15].
The only cluster showing greater activation for the ASK condition was found in the the ventral aspect of the posterior
cingulate cortex. This region has often been associated with
what is known as the default mode network [38] which shows
decreased activation when a task is performed and increased
activity when mind-wandering. We will return to discussion
of the posterior cingulate later in the paper.
An interesting finding is that the situation when an answer
could be provided, and thus an information need did not exist, provided 4 of the 5 clusters. Moreover, these clusters
can be considered a network involving memory retrieval, information accumulation and working memory, all functions
we would expect when a participant can provide an answer
to the question. The remaining cluster in ventral posterior
cingulate provides us with a putative brain region where
activity reflects IN. Activity in this region has been hypothesised [29] to reflect a narrow focus of attention on internal
information, and this is consistent with the ”need to search”
response in Scenario 1. Here, the response can be generated
by assessing internally only that it was not possible to provide an answer; for success in the task there is no need to
modify behaviour or to broaden the focus of attention.
Analysis of Scenario 2 (RQS): In Scenario 2 we investigated brain activity when participants were presented with
questions and possible responses and if they responded that
a search was needed then they would subsequently engage
in a search. For all participants we contrasted brain activity
when they provided an answer versus when they provided
the response that they needed to search. Again we hypothesised that this contrast would reveal brain regions associ-

4.1 General Linear Model (GLM) Analysis
Analysis began with a first-level analysis on the data of individual participants using multiple linear regression of the
BOLD-response time course in each voxel, using two predictors for the different Response Type (respond need to
search, respond with answer). To achieve this, for each participant’s data a BrainVoyager protocol file (PRT) was derived that represented the onset and duration of the 8s total
time that the question (4s) and question and possible responses (4s) were available. Predictors’ time courses were
adjusted for the hemodynamic response delay by convolution with a hemodynamic response function. Group data
were statistically tested with a second-level analysis using a
random effects analysis of variance using Response Type as
a within-participants factor. To address the issue of multiple statistical comparisons across all voxels, activations are
reported using False Discovery Rate (FDR) at a threshold
of q < 0.01 [10]. Using FDR we control for the number of
false positive voxels among the subset of voxels labelled as
significant.
Main Results: The key findings which emerged from
the results are that the analysis of fMRI brain data revealed
differences in brain activity due to whether participants experienced IN or not. These differences appeared sensitive to
whether or not the IN was associated with actually making a
search or simply deciding that a search would be necessary.
Although several brain regions showed differential activity
5

http://www.BrainVoyager.com

340

Figure 3:

The five activation clusters from Scenario 1 are projected onto the average anatomical structure for three transverse sections. Note
that the brains are in radiological format where the left side of the brain is on the right side of the image.

Table 1:

Details of Scenario 1 activations, including their anatomic label, location, Brodmann Area (BA), effect size and volume.
Talairach Coordinates

Brain Area
Caudate Head
Thalmus
ventral Posterior Cingulate
Caudate Body
Inferior Frontal Gyrus

Hemisphere
Right
Left
Left

X
11
-1
-4

Y
10
-11
-44

Z
3
12
12

BA
29

F(1,23)
42.91
52.39
33.09

p-value
0.000001
<0.000001
0.000007

Number
of voxels
mm3
427
2017
263

Left
Left

-19
-46

-17
31

21
6

46

39.03
107.63

0.000002
<0.000001

282
8024

ated with successful memory retrieval and working memory
when they responded with an answer, signifying No-IN. In
contrast to Scenario 1, such a result was not obtained. Instead we only found regions where brain activity was greater
for IN, including a region of the posterior cingulate known
as the dorsal posterior cingulate.
The results, based on all 24 participants, for the effect
of the factor Type of Response are shown for Scenario 2
in Figure 4 plotted on an average brain and in Table 2.
Again, to help assess the direction of the effect, parameter estimates are displayed as bar charts for each cluster.
All clusters including the fusiform gyrus, the dorsal posterior cingulate and the cuneus (extending into the precuneus)
showed greater activation for the IN condition. As both
the precuneus and posterior cingulate clusters have been associated with the default mode network, it is perhaps not
surprising that deactivations are apparent for these regions.

Effect size

The fusiform gyrus is often associated with high level visual
processing and it is possible that this cluster reflects greater
visual activity when participants were in the state of IN.
The fact that the posterior cingulate was again identified
as a region where activity was greater for the IN condition
further raises the possibility that monitoring activity in this
area could provide a useful brain signal for identifying information need. The fact that it was the dorsal posterior
cingulate is important from a theoretical perspective. It has
been hypothesised that the dorsal posterior cingulate is involved when there is brain activity directed towards external
sources and broad attention is used [29]. This is consistent
with the need to search as the individual must transition
from a state of accessing internal information to one where
they are engaging with the collection of new information
from external sources.

341

Figure 4:

The three activation clusters from Scenario 2 are shown projected onto the average anatomical structure for three transverse sections.
Note that the brains are in radiological format where the left side of the brain is on the right side of the image.

Table 2:

Details of Scenario 2 activations, including their anatomic label, location, Brodmann Area (BA), effect size and volume.
Talairach Coordinates

Brain Area
Fusiform Gyrus
Cuneus
dorsal Posterior Cingulate

Hemisphere
Right
Left
Left

X
41
-7
-10

Y
-50
-74
-29

Significance of the Posterior Cingulate: As we have
discussed in relation to the current results, both the greater
activation during IN and the switch between ventral and
dorsal regions when an actual search is performed provide a
unique signature for IN. In this regard it is useful to review
that the posterior cingulate is thought to be what is known
as a ”hub” area. Such areas are known to be densely connected with many different brain regions and to be involved
in the coordination of large scale brain networks. One function of the posterior cingulate appears to be in the balance
between directing brain activity towards either internal or
external sources and this role resonates with the requirements of detecting IN in that detecting the switch between
internal and external processing is synonymous with search.

5.

Z
-12
24
27

Effect size
BA
37
18
23

F(1,23)
31.29
38.64
60.35

p-value
0.000011
0.000002
<0.000001

Number
of voxels
mm3
266
3453
2147

nomenon (i.e. at a visceral level), even the searcher may
not be aware of its existence. This renders the measuring
of this concept (using traditional behaviour studies) nearly
impossible. Using functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(fMRI), we measured the brain activity of twenty four participants while they performed a Question Answering (Q/A)
Task. In order to do so, we devised a “within-subjects” design experiment where the independent variable was the information need (with two levels: Information Need, and NoInformation Need), which was controlled by responding to
questions viewed on the screen. A set of questions were designed for a typical participant to respond equally between
expressing an information need to answer the question or
expressing a need to search for more information to answer
the question using TREC-8 and TREC 2001 Q/A Tracks.
The dependent variable was brain activity revealed by the
BOLD signal.
We implemented two different task scenarios to create information need, in both scenarios participants were asked
a multiple choice question, but in the first scenario when
participants confronted an ASK they only had the option
to acknowledge that they needed to search, they could not
act on this IN (i.e. QR Task). In the second scenario when
participants confronted an ASK they were able to engage in
a search process (i.e. QRS Task). Our hypothesis was that
there exists brain regions for which the activation levels are

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

This paper investigated the concept of information need
from a neuropsychological perspective by investigating brain
activity during periods in which an information need was
induced. The raison d’etre of IR is to satisfy human information needs. Despite advances in the past few decades
in both the IR and relevant scientific communities, we do
not really understand how an information need emerges and
how it is physically manifested. Information need refers to
a complex concept: at the very initial state of the phe-

342

different depending on the state of information need and
that the regions found for these two scenarios would provide measurement data of brain states to complement our
theoretical understanding of IN.
The key findings which emerged from the results are that
the analysis of fMRI brain data revealed differences in brain
activity due to whether participants experienced IN or not
(addressing RQ2). These differences were obtained from
modelling brain activity during the presentation of the question and possible responses and thus precede the actual decision to search (addressing RQ3). These differences appeared sensitive to whether or not the IN was associated
with actually making a search or simply deciding that a
search would be necessary (addressing RQ4). Although several brain regions showed differential activity with IN, our
results point to a particular region of the brain known as
the posterior cingulate which is known to be a critical hub
area involved in coordinating brain activity between the internal and external environment. We speculate that this
hub nature of switching between large scale brain networks
that involve either internal or external processing could be
an essential component of IN (addressing some issues raised
by RQ1).
The results for the QR task of Scenario 1 and the QRS
task of Scenario 2 provided strikingly different results. In the
QR task of Scenario 1 the contrast of brain activation between the IN and No-IN conditions revealed greater activity
for the IN condition in one brain area (posterior cingulate)
and greater activity for the No-IN condition in four of the
five areas obtained. These four areas can be associated with
recalling information and making a decision. Relating this
to IR we see evidence for the neural substrate involved with
successfully recovering internal knowledge, a situation that
relieves the need for information. However, a primary interest of the current research is to explore what brain regions
are associated with IN. Thus, the results of the QRS task of
Scenario 2 are of interest since we see that all three regions
reported had greater activity for the IN condition. In particular, the dorsal posterior cingulate provides results similar
to that found for the ventral posterior cingulate found in
Scenario 1.
These differences between dorsal and ventral activation of
posterior cingulate can be related to theories of the posterior cingulate and its special role in brain function [29]. The
posterior cingulate is known to be an area that is metabolically active, using substantial energy and serving as a hub
that regulates cognitive activity. It is especially involved in
regulating brain resources between engaging in internal or
external processes and the Arousal, Balance and Breadth
of Attention (ABBA) model provides an explanation of the
differences between the IN conditions in Scenarios 1 and 2.
The model holds that activation in ventral posterior cingulate is consistent with a narrow internal focus while activation in dorsal posterior cingulate is consistent with a broad
external focus. Thus, in Scenario 1, when participants need
only to focus on the fact that they need to search (not what
they need to search or mechanisms of search) the pattern of
results in posterior cingulate shows a narrow and internal
focus. However, in Scenario 2, when participants need to
engage in a subsequent search task the pattern of results in
posterior cingulate shows a broad and external focus. The
implication for IR is that the differential patterns of activation in the posterior cingulate provide a window into how

cognitive processes are being directed and switching state
from a narrow internal focus to a broad external focus can
be used as a sign of a searcher needing to gather information
from external sources.
Regarding the pattern of activity in posterior cingulate
several aspects deserve further investigation. One is whether
this general difference of activity found between IN and noIN is unique, the posterior cingulate is a complicated and
densely connected brain region and other differences in cognitive states might reveal similar patterns of BOLD activity.
This could be explained by heterogeneity of function in the
posterior cingulate, or possibly by some more basic, and yet
undetermined, mechanism that is common to IN and other
cognitive processes. One possible way forward to studying
this would for more detailed analysis of the spatiotemporal
pattern of activity in posterior cingulate to determine the
encoding of IN. Research in these directions would potentially aid in ways to exploit this neural signal in retrieval
systems.
While our present interpretation of brain activity provides
a parsimonious account of how IN is represented in the brain,
further study is needed to advance this interpretation. One
possible way forward is to perform a more detailed analysis of the spatiotemporal pattern of activity in posterior
cingulate to see whether multivariate techniques of machine
learning could provide a means to decode IN directly from
brain activity, rather than to infer it from univariate comparison of brain activity during IN and no-IN states. Such
a result could pave the way, as brain measuring technology
advances, to monitor the IN state of an individual and to
exploit this knowledge in a search engine system. Prerequisites to achieve this would be to confirm that this pattern of
activity in posterior cingulate is robust across different IN
scenarios as well as being unique to IN.
Our present results indicating differences between the QR
and QRS tasks show the importance of task on brain activation. Thus, a meaningful research direction to pursue would
be to investigate similar research questions in the context
of other information retrieval and interaction tasks. This
could provide converging evidence and would advance our
neurotheoretical understanding of IN leading to exploitation
of such signals in functioning IR systems.
In conclusion, the results of this experiment revealed a
distributed network of brain regions commonly associated
with information retrieval and produced novel results about
the neural bases of information need. These results have
implications both for theories explaining information need
and the potential to design systems that could detect information need. Finally, we believe our study and conclusions
constitute an important step in unravelling the nature of
information need and therefore better satisfying it.
Acknowledgement: This work was supported by the Economic and Social Research Council [grant number ES/L011921/1].

6. REFERENCES

[1] M. Allegretti, Y. Moshfeghi, M. Hadjigeorgieva, F. E.
Pollick, J. M. Jose, and G. Pasi. When relevance judgement
is happening?: An eeg-based study. In SIGIR ’15, New
York, NY, USA, 2015. ACM.
[2] I. Arapakis, K. Athanasakos, and J. M. Jose. A comparison
of general vs personalised affective models for the prediction
of topical relevance. In SIGIR ’10, pages 371–378, 2010.
[3] I. Arapakis, I. Konstas, and J. M. Jose. Using facial
expressions and peripheral physiological signals as implicit

343

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]
[8]

[9]
[10]

[11]

[12]
[13]

[14]

[15]
[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]
[20]
[21]

[22]
[23]

[24]

indicators of topical relevance. In MM ’ 09, pages 461–470,
2009.
I. Arapakis, Y. Moshfeghi, H. Joho, R. Ren, D. Hannah,
and J. M. Jose. Enriching user profiling with affective
features for the improvement of a multimodal recommender
system. CIVR ’09, 2009.
I. Arapakis, Y. Moshfeghi, H. Joho, R. Ren, D. Hannah,
and J. M. Jose. Integrating facial expressions into user
profiling for the improvement of a multimodal
recommender system. In ICME ’09, pages 1440–1443, 2009.
A. K. Barbey, M. Koenigs, and J. Grafman. Dorsolateral
prefrontal contributions to human working memory. Cortex,
49(5):1195–1205, 2013.
M. J. Bates. Indexing and access for digital libraries and
the internet: Human, database, and domain factors.
JASIST, 49(13):1185–1205, 1998.
N. Belkin, R. Oddy, and H. Brooks. ASK for information
retrieval: Part I. Background and theory. Journal of
Documentation, 38(2):61–71, 1982.
N. J. Belkin, R. N. Oddy, and H. M. Brooks. ASK for
information retrieval: Part II. Results of a design study.
Journal of documentation, 38(3):145–164, 1982.
Y. Benjamini and Y. Hochberg. Controlling the false
discovery rate: a practical and powerful approach to
multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society.
Series B (Methodological), pages 289–300, 1995.
C. L. Borgman. From Gutenberg to the global information
infrastructure: access to information in the networked
world. Mit Press, 2000.
C. Cole. A theory of information need for information
retrieval that connects information to knowledge. JASIST,
62(7):1216–1231, 2011.
C. Cole, C.-A. Julien, and J. E. Leide. An associative index
model for hypertext internet search based on vannevar
bushâĂŹs memex machine: An exploratory case study.
Information Research, 15(3):15–3, 2010.
A. Dimoka. How to conduct a functional magnetic
resonance (fmri) study in social science research. MIS
Quarterly, 36(3):811–840, 2012.
L. Ding and J. I. Gold. Caudate encodes multiple
computations for perceptual decisions. The Journal of
Neuroscience, 30(47):15747–15759, 2010.
B. Draganski, F. Kherif, S. Klöppel, P. A. Cook, D. C.
Alexander, G. J. Parker, R. Deichmann, J. Ashburner, and
R. S. Frackowiak. Evidence for segregated and integrative
connectivity patterns in the human basal ganglia. The
Journal of Neuroscience, 28(28):7143–7152, 2008.
M. J. Eugster, T. Ruotsalo, M. M. Spapé, I. Kosunen,
O. Barral, N. Ravaja, G. Jacucci, and S. Kaski. Predicting
term-relevance from brain signals. In SIGIR’14, pages
425–434. ACM, 2014.
K. Friston, C. Buechel, G. Fink, J. Morris, E. Rolls, and
R. Dolan. Psychophysiological and modulatory interactions
in neuroimaging. NeuroImage, 6:218–229, 2007.
R. Goebel. BrainVoyager QX, Vers.2.1, Brain Innovation
B.V. Maastricht, Netherlands.
B. Hjørland. The foundation of the concept of relevance.
JASIST, 61(2):217–237, 2010.
P. Ingwersen. Cognitive perspectives of information
retrieval interaction: elements of a cognitive ir theory.
Journal of documentation, 52(1):3–50, 1996.
T. Joachims, L. Granka, B. Pan, H. Hembrooke, and
G. Gay. Accurately interpreting clickthrough data as
implicit feedback. In SIGIR ’05, pages 154–161, 2005.
J. P. Kauppi, M. Kandemir, V. M. Saarinen, L. Hirvenkari,
L. Parkkonen, A. Klami, R. Hari, and S. Kaski. Towards
brain-activity-controlled information retrieval: Decoding
image relevance from MEG signals. NeuroImage, in press,
2015.
D. Kelly and N. Belkin. A user modeling system for

[25]

[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]

[30]

[31]
[32]
[33]

[34]
[35]
[36]

[37]
[38]

[39]
[40]

[41]
[42]

[43]
[44]
[45]

[46]
[47]

344

personalized interaction and tailored retrieval in interactive
ir. ASIST, 39(1):316–325, 2005.
D. Kelly and N. J. Belkin. Display time as implicit
feedback: understanding task effects. In SIGIR ’04, pages
377–384, New York, NY, USA, 2004. ACM.
D. Kelly and X. Fu. Eliciting better information need
descriptions from users of information search systems. Inf.
Process. Manage., 43(1):30–46, Jan. 2007.
J. Koenemann and N. J. Belkin. A case for interaction: a
study of interactive information retrieval behavior and
effectiveness. In SIGCHI ’96, pages 205–212. ACM, 1996.
C. C. Kuhlthau. A principle of uncertainty for information
seeking. Journal of Documentation, 49(4):339–355, 1993.
R. Leech and D. J. Sharp. The role of the posterior
cingulate cortex in cognition and disease. Brain,
137(1):12–32, 2014.
L. Lorigo, M. Haridasan, H. Brynjarsdóttir, L. Xia,
T. Joachims, G. Gay, L. Granka, F. Pellacini, and B. Pan.
Eye tracking and online search: Lessons learned and
challenges ahead. JASIST, 59(7):1041–1052, 2008.
R. McGill, J. W. Tukey, and W. A. Larsen. Variations of
box plots. American Statistician, 32(1):12–16, 1978.
A. S. Mitchell and S. Chakraborty. What does the
mediodorsal thalamus do? Frontiers in systems
neuroscience, 7, 2013.
Y. Moshfeghi and J. M. Jose. An effective implicit relevance
feedback technique using affective, physiological and
behavioural features. In SIGIR ’13, pages 133–142, 2013.
Y. Moshfeghi and J. M. Jose. On cognition, emotion, and
interaction aspects of search tasks with different search
intentions. In WWW, pages 931–942, 2013.
Y. Moshfeghi, L. R. Pinto, F. E. Pollick, and J. M. Jose.
Understanding relevance: An fmri study. In ECIR, pages
14–25, 2013.
D. M. Nichols. Implicit rating and filtering. In Proceedings
of the Fifth DELOS Workshop on Filtering and
Collaborative Filtering, pages 31–36, 1997.
R. C. Oldfield. The assessment and analysis of handedness:
the edinburgh inventory. Neuropsychologia, 9(1):97–113,
1971.
M. E. Raichle, A. M. MacLeod, A. Z. Snyder, W. J.
Powers, D. A. Gusnard, and G. L. Shulman. A default
mode of brain function. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 98(2):676–682, 2001.
J. Talairach and P. Tournoux. Co-planar stereotaxic atlas
of the human brain, volume 147. Thieme New York:, 1988.
R. S. Taylor. Question-negotiation and information seeking
in libraries. College & research libraries, 29(3):178–194,
1968.
P. I. und Kalervo Järvelin. The Turn: Integration of
Information Seeking and Retrieval in Context. Springer,
2005. xiv, 448 S. ISBN 1-4020-3850-X, 2006.
C. van Rijsbergen. (invited paper) A new theoretical
framework for information retrieval. In SIGIR, pages
194–200. ACM, 1986.
R. White and D. Kelly. A study on the effects of
personalization and task information on implicit feedback
performance. In CIKM, pages 297–306, 2006.
R. W. White. Implicit Feedback for Interactive Information
Retrieval. PhD thesis, University of Glasgow, 2004.
R. W. White, J. M. Jose, and I. Ruthven. A task-oriented
study on the influencing effects of query-biased
summarisation in web searching. IPM ’03, 39(5):707–733,
2003.
T. D. Wilson. On user studies and information needs.
Journal of documentation, 37(1):3–15, 1981.
Q. Zhao, Z. Zhou, H. Xu, S. Chen, F. Xu, W. Fan, and
L. Han. Dynamic neural network of insight: a functional
magnetic resonance imaging study on solving chinese
‘chengyu’ riddles. PloS one, 8(3):e59351, 2013.

