The Essence of Time: Considering Temporal Relevance
as an Intent-Aware Ranking Problem
Stewart Whiting
School of Computing Science
University of Glasgow, UK

stewh@dcs.gla.ac.uk
ABSTRACT

tory and viewing counts can be mined for event-driven signals for
many real-life topics, allowing the measurement of various temporal characteristics. Early analysis suggests Wikipedia provides
an effective source of event-based evidence for TDT tasks. Effectiveness evaluation of such a system in real-time poses a number of challenges. We propose an evaluation methodology based
on query-log mining and crowdsourcing for on-going relevance assessment.

Real-time news and social media quickly reflect large-scale phenomena and events. As users become exposed to this information,
time plays a central role in prompting both information authorship
and seeking activities.
The objective of this research is to develop a retrieval system
which can anticipate a user’s likely temporal intent(s), considering recent or ongoing real-world events. Such a system should not
only provide recent news when relevant, but also higher rank nontimestamped or even older documents which are temporally pertinent as they cover aspects related to recent event topics.
Key challenges to be addressed in this work include: a suitable
source and method for event detection and tracking, an intent-aware
ranking approach and an evaluation methodology.

2.

Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.3.3 [Information Storage
and Retrieval] - Information Search and Retrieval - Retrieval Models
General Terms: Algorithms, Experimentation
Keywords: Temporal, Time, Event, Relevance, Intent

1.

RESEARCH PROPOSAL

We propose four research questions (RQ) which this thesis will
investigate, following each is an underlying hypothesis:
RQ1: Can search topics with recent event-related temporal intent be detected?
If there is a chance that a user’s query has an intent that was
prompted by a recent event, then it is appropriate to consider temporal relevance in document ranking.
RQ2: Can the temporal sensitivity of a query topic (or, intent)
be computed using historic and recent Wikipedia article revision
history, and page view statistics?
Wikipedia provides large-scale coverage of article creation/edit
history and page view statistics for real-life topics. This temporal evidence is accurate and extensive enough for mining user behaviour and editing trends driven by events.
RQ3: Given the temporal sensitivity of a query topic, can intent
ranking be improved by incorporating temporal intent pertinence?
An intent’s temporal pertinence may change as the trending topic
changes. Increasing the ranking of aspects that are temporally pertinent will improve relevance ranking for a user that is looking for
information relating to a temporally-prompted intent.
RQ4: If a query topic itself is not temporally sensitive, yet, an
aspect is related to a recent event, can intent ranking be improved
by incorporating temporal intent pertinence?
Similar to the previous hypothesis, although a query topic may
not be itself directly temporally sensitive, the user’s intent may be
prompted because it is related to a recent event.

INTRODUCTION

In this work we propose a notion of temporal relevance, whereby
recent events related to the query topic influence the relevance of
non-timestamped or older documents during retrieval.
Previous analysis suggests a great deal of information seeking
activity is likely to arise from interaction with media as users wish
to learn more about trending or hot topics. As such, many search
topics have a temporal affinity, affecting not only query volume but
also in many cases, intent at different periods in time [2].
Users may first wish to find out more about the event itself. News
articles are undoubtedly most relevant for these initial needs. However, further information needs may arise from knowledge of the
event, in order to answer more in-depth related questions such as:
who, where, why and how? Each topic is likely to have documents
considered temporally pertinent, that is, they refer to aspects most
involved with the event. Conversely, when an event is no longer
prominent, documents covering these typically less popular aspects
will become no longer temporally pertinent and therefore less important.
To model temporal relevance we treat it as an intent-aware ranking [3] problem. For each intent, during ranking we compute a
measure of temporal intent pertinence, thus higher ranking intents
that refer to aspects related to recent events. Using Topic Detection
and Tracking (TDT) techniques [1], Wikipedia article revision his-

3.

REFERENCES

[1] J. Allan. Introduction to topic detection and tracking, pages
1–16. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Norwell, MA, USA,
2002.
[2] A. Kulkarni, J. Teevan, K. M. Svore, and S. T. Dumais.
Understanding temporal query dynamics. In ACM WSDM ’11,
pages 167–176, New York, NY, USA, 2011. ACM.
[3] C. Zhai, W. W. Cohen, and J. D. Lafferty. Beyond independent
relevance: methods and evaluation metrics for subtopic
retrieval. In SIGIR ’03, pages 10–17, 2003.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

1000

