Integrative Online Research-Data Management
Michael Huggett and Edie Rasmussen
University of British Columbia
Suite 470, 1961 East Mall, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1
(1-604) 827-5486

{m.huggett, edie.rasmussen}@ubc.ca
ABSTRACT

2. OVERVIEW OF THE PROTOTYPE

In support of our research projects in information retrieval, we
have developed an integrated multi-process software system that
shepherds research data from induction through aggregation,
analysis, and presentation. We combine public-domain code
libraries with our own software to provide a flexible, easilyconfigured modular system that exposes data online for easier
collaboration. The goal is to create a single online infrastructure
that allows colleagues to submit, process, analyze and visualize
data, and discuss and prioritize issues through a single integrated
interface. We demonstrate our system within the context of the
large data set provided by the Indexer’s Legacy project [1].

The prototype manages the data life cycle in four key modules:
Data is inducted by parsing input data streams. Our prototype
provides a raw-text parser, a table parser, and a web scraper. The
aggregation module combines data from multiple sources to
create summary tables and data objects, which once created can
be re-used for further analyses. The analysis module is configured
with user-selected filter algorithms to find descriptive trends in
input data. Our prototype includes a SOLR search engine [3] and
the R statistics package [4]. The display module automatically
generates web pages of result tables and graphs to be shared with
other project members.

Categories and Subject Descriptors

input data

H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: User
Interfaces – evaluation/methodology, prototyping

Keywords
Digital collections, visualization, user interfaces.

User
Studies
&
Surveys

unstructured text

Aggregator

parsers

Analyzer

filters

1. RESEARCH-DATA MANAGEMENT
Given a server that can support common research practices, online
research collaboration presents several advantages. Data is stored
in a central canonical easily-accessed repository, guaranteed to be
the most current available. Versioning, automated backups and
redundant storage prevent data loss. Tests and processes can be
uploaded to the server and run on the data where it is stored,
obviating the need to download all and run it on a team member's
local machine. Tests and results can be double-checked directly
online and confirmed by other members of the research team. If
desired, data, processes, and results can also be shared with the
world online, as befitting calls within the research community for
easier replicability and an "open data" ethos [2].

Display

Web crawlers, user studies, and surveys are administered directly
from the server through a web browser, and the accumulated data
is stored directly on the same machine where it will be analyzed,
reducing upload time and cost. Databases that store related metadata can also be configured and edited through a web browser,
and accessed as needed from any process within the server.
Discussions of team members can also be centralized and shared:
critical issues can be raised, discussed, assigned, and prioritized
using a text-based issue-tracking module (as for bug-tracking).

data tables
sensor data

visualization
parameters

Figure 1: Data flow through the integrated system.
System modules are in boxes.
The server uses embedded technology, can be run immediately on
any Java-enabled machine, and requires only simple port
forwarding to expose its services to the internet.

3. REFERENCES
[1] Huggett, M. & Rasmussen, E. The Indexer's Legacy:
Promoting Access to a Million Books, ICDL 2010.
[2] Kauppinen, T. & Espindola, G. M. D. 2011. Linked Open
Science-Communicating, Sharing and Evaluating Data,
Methods and Results for Executable Papers. Procedia
Computer Science 4: 726.
[3] Apache SOLR, http://lucene.apache.org/solr/
[4] The R Project for Statistical Computing,
http://www.r-project.org/

In our system, we demonstrate an integrative approach that
combines all of these abilities in a single, easy-to-use software
platform. Such centralization of research data and meta-data helps
ensure that all team members are talking about the same thing,
and also the right thing.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12-16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

1007

