MaSe: Create Your Own Mash-Up Search Interface
Leif Azzopardi, Douglas Dowie, Kelly Ann Marshall
School of Computing Science
University of Glasgow
United Kingdom

{leif, doug, kellym}@dcs.gla.ac.uk

Richard Glassey

School of Computing
Robert Gordon University
United Kingdom

r.j.glassey@rgu.ac.uk

Categories and Subject Descriptors:
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]:
Information Search and Retrieval
General Terms: Design, Human Factors
Keywords: Information Retrieval, Children

Personalised

Theme & Colour

Icons indicate source

EXTENDED ABSTRACT
MaSe provides a sandbox environment for high school students to create their own personalised search interface. It
has been designed with two major goals in mind: (1) as a
hands-on tutorial for school children, to excite them about
programming and computing science through the development of a practical application, and (2) to enable children
to design and create their own search interface without extensive programming knowledge or prior experience. Consequently, MaSe provides a way to ascertain what children
would like from a search engine interface in an exploratory
and creative way as they can create a working prototype.
This approach contrasts with previous work on exploring
children’s requirements of IR systems which attempts to directly elicit user needs through more traditional methods
(i.e. surveys, interviews, focus groups, etc) [2, 3]. However,
we have attempted to incorporate the design guidelines for
children as identiﬁed by [2, 3] into MaSe, where: we make
use of bright colours, large text fonts, spell checking and the
use of icons to represent search services, as well as including
a thematic experience as suggested by [2], with the use of a
puppy avatar and puppy dog footprints.
MaSe1 is built using the PuppyIR framework [1], which
utilises a pipe and ﬁlter architecture. The framework provides a number of query and document processing components to ﬁlter and modify the content (i.e. to ﬁlter out
inappropriate words, expand queries, simplify snippets and
more) and has connections to a wide range of back end search
services such as Bing, YouTube, Twitter, Flickr, etc. During
the tutorial, students connect these components together to
create various search services, which teaches them about: (1)
how information ﬂows through a pipe and ﬁlter architecture,
and (2) how they can conﬁgure diﬀerent search services and
their associated pipelines for their search interface. Students
can then select and customise the set of search services that
they would like within their search interface. As discussed

Search Services
and results can
be configured.

Result sets can be moved about interface

Figure 1: Maddie’s search interface using MaSe.
in [2, 3], it is theorised that by allowing children to personalise their own search interface this will lead to a greater
sense of ownership over their design and a greater sense of
accomplishment. This should not only result in an enjoyable
and positive experience of programming, but also provide an
engaging experience of designing search interfaces. To this
end, the interface can be easily customised. MaSe allows for
the selection of a colour scheme, naming of the search engine, custom arrangement of search results using drag and
drop, and the customisation of search services (by creating
and customising the PuppyIR components in the code so the
type of results, number of results and search services to be
presented can be manipulated).
To date we have evaluated MaSe with approximately 100
university students, where even students with minimal programming experience were able to successfully complete the
tutorial in about an hour with minimal assistance. Overall,
their feedback was positive and that they enjoyed creating
their own search interface. Next we plan to conduct studies with high school students to see what kinds of interfaces
that they would like and what they design.

REFERENCES

[1] R. Glassey, T. Polajnar, and L.Azzopardi. PuppyIR Unleashed:
A Framework for Building Child-Oriented Information Services.
In In Proc. of the 11th Dutch-Belgian IR Workshop, 2011.
[2] A. Large, J. Beheshti, V. Nesset, and L. Bowler. Web portal
design guidelines as identiﬁed by children through the processes
of design and evaluation. In Procs. of the 69th ASIST, 2006.
[3] A. Large, J. Beheshti, and T. Rahman. Design criteria for
children’s web portals: The users speak out. Journal of the
ASIST, 53(2):79–94, 2002.

1

See http://puppyir.sourgeforge.net for the list of the underlying
technologies used and the tutorial documentation.

Acknowledgements: PuppyIR is funded by the EC’s FP7 20072013 under grant agreement no. 231507. We would also like to thank
Catriona Dowie for the puppy cartoons.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

1008

