A Framework for Manipulating and Searching Multiple
Retrieval Types
Marc-Allen Cartright, Ethem F. Can, William Dabney, Jeff Dalton,
Logan Giorda, Kriste Krstovski, Xiaoye Wu, Ismet Zeki Yalniz,
James Allan, R. Manmatha, and David Smith
Center for Intelligent Information Retrieval
Dept. of Computer Science
Univ. of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01003

ABSTRACT

We introduce Proteus, a data model for representing, searching, and browsing objects extracted from book collections.
The Proteus model defines an API for potential data sources
to implement and use to provide and exchange information
using that data model. Implementing this API allows Proteus to use the items from the system as part of the retrievable set of items, enabling horizontal movement between the
“vertical” data types.
We demonstrate the value of Proteus with an implementation of the framework we have developed at the Center
for Intelligent Information Retrieval. We have indexed a set
of books from the Internet Archive. We use focused collections centered on topics such as William Shakespeare, the
westward migration of American settlers, and the American
Revolution. In each instance we provide the ability to retrieve pages, books, named persons, locations, and images
from these collections, and navigate between them. We also
integrate information from DBPedia to provide an existing
ontology for the identified objects in the books.
We see the demonstration as an opportunity for users to
browse a collection in a new way and discover information
that would otherwise be difficult or impossible to deduce
through previous navigation systems. The demonstration
will be available at http://books.cs.umass.edu website.

Conventional retrieval systems view documents as a unit
and look at different retrieval types within a document. We
introduce Proteus, a frame-work for seamlessly navigating
books as dynamic collections which are defined on the fly.
Proteus allows us to search various retrieval types. Navigable types include pages, books, named persons, locations,
and pictures in a collection of books taken from the Internet
Archive. The demonstration shows the value of multi-type
browsing in dynamic collections to peruse new data.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information
Search and Retrieval—Search Process; H.5.4 [Information
Storage and Retrieval]: Hypertext/Hypermedia—Navigation

General Terms
Design, Human Factors, Standardization

Keywords
Proteus, object search, navigation

Acknowledgements This work was supported in part by
the Center for Intelligent Information Retrieval and in part
by NSF grant #IIS-0910884. Any opinions, findings and
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material
are the authors’ and do not necessarily reflect those of the
sponsors.

The idea of browsing over different types of information
has been explored by various web sites and researchers for
some time [1, 2]. Most efforts to date either collapse the
types into one retrieval list or only use boolean-matching
queries. These systems provide no way to maintain the separation between the types while performing boolean or ranked
search while switching between types – for example, starting from a set of books discussing the trek of Marco Polo
between Europe and Asia, then requesting ranked locations
mentioned in that set of books and, from there, change to
the people who are prominent at those locations, switching
to books that discuss those people, and so on. We believe
the next step in information systems is to afford seamless
movement between boolean and ranked retrieval of such different retrieval types enabling users to easily negotiate this
complex information space.

REFERENCES

[1] S. Dumais, E. Cutrell, J. Cadiz, G. Jancke, R. Sarin, and
D. C. Robbins. Stuff i’ve seen: a system for personal
information retrieval and re-use. In Proc. SIGIR 2003, pages
72–79, New York, NY, USA, 2003. ACM.
[2] C. Lagoze, S. Payette, E. Shin, and C. Wilper. Fedora: an
architecture for complex objects and their relationships.
International Journal on Digital Libraries, 6:124–138, 2006.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

1001

