PageFetch: A Retrieval Game for Children (and Adults)
Richard Glassey

Jim Purvis, Leif Azzopardi

School of Computing
Robert Gordon University
United Kingdom

School of Computing Science
University of Glasgow
United Kingdom

{0801303P@student, leif@dcs} .gla.ac.uk

r.j.glassey@rgu.ac.uk

EXTENDED ABSTRACT

Children often struggle with information retrieval tasks as
searching for information often requires a developed vocabulary and strong categorisation skills; neither of which are
particularly developed in children under the age of 12 [1].
In a study conducted by Druin et al [2], it was found that
in an experimental setting many children are often uninterested in searching for information online or are only interested in searching for information that is relevant to their
personal interests. Consequently, children who were unmotivated were the least successful in completing information
retrieval tasks in their study. It was suggested that a more
e↵ective means of engaging child participants in search studies must be developed in order to gain further insights into
the searching behaviours of children. To this end we have
developed a game called PageFetch which aims to engage
children (aged 8 to 80) in completing search tasks through
a fun and interactive search-like interface.
PageFetch is quite similar to other Human Computation
Games developed in IR, i.e. PageHunt [3] and Fu-Finder [4],
which have been used to improve search engines and study
querying behavior, respectively. In these games, players are
presented with a web page, and they need to enter in a query
that retrieves the page. Players have three minutes to try
and find as many of the pages as possible. However, PageFetch is novel, in a number of respects: (1) PageHunt and
Fu-Finder used a similar set of pages (a mixture of hard and
easy to find pages given Bing’s search engine at the time), in
PageFetch pages from six di↵erent categories were used (cartoons, music, sports, politics, actors and news) to provide a
range of genres for children and adults1 . (2) Thus, players
are given a choice of category from which pages are presented
(rather than random categories/pages). The choice of categories provides more focused game play and lets players pick
a genre that is of interest. (3) Unlike PageHunt, PageFetch
assigns points according to how high the results page is returned (i.e. the higher the rank the more points), and unlike
Fu-Finder, PageFetch uses only one search engine (Bing), as
opposed to three. Finally, (4) PageFetch was designed to
encourage players to focus on entering successful queries for
each page, which is achieved by providing a “no pass” bonus.
If a player can find each page presented, regardless of how

3 minutes per game
Helpful dogalogue boxes
Search
The page to find
Score for current query

Pass

No pass bonus & total

Figure 1: In game PageFetch screenshot.
many query attempts for a particular page, the player receives bonus points (where the more pages they find in a
row the higher the bonus). This feature tries to stimulate
query re-formulations and was included to see whether we
could encourage players to improve their searching abilities
i.e. helping them to learn to search better. It is envisaged
that through repeated gameplay that children (as well as
adults) would be able to improve their performance as they
refine their search strategies to retrieve pages. Currently,
we undertaking a number of evaluations with school children and general web gamers/users2 , where we hope that
these studies will establish a better understanding of the
search proficiency of younger information seekers.
Categories and Subject Descriptors:
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]:
Information Search and Retrieval
General Terms: Design, Human Factors
Keywords: Human Computational Games

REFERENCES

[1] Large A., Nesset V., and Beheshti J. Children as information
seekers: what researchers tell us. New Review of Children’s
Literature and Librarianship, 14(2):121–140, 2008.
[2] A. Druin, E.h Foss, H. Hutchinson, E. Golub, and L. Hatley.
Children’s roles using keyword search interfaces at home. In
Proceedings of the 28th SIGCHI, pages 413–422, 2010.
[3] H. Ma, R. Chandrasekar, C. Quirk, and A. Gupta. Improving
search engines using human computation games. In Proceeding
of the 18th CIKM, pages 275–284, 2009.
[4] C. O’Neil, J. Purvis, and L. Azzopardi. Fu-finder: a game for
studying querying behaviours. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM
CIKM, pages 2561–2564, 2011.

1

Pages were selected using trending search terms for under-12s,
under-16 and adults from 2011.

Acknowledgements: PuppyIR is funded by the EC’s FP7 20072013 under grant agreement no. 231507. We would like to thank
Doug Dowie and Carly O’Neil for their help and assistance.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

2

1010

See http://www.dcs.gla.ac.uk/access/pagefetch/

