YooSee: A Video Browsing Application for Young Children
Leif Azzopardi, Douglas Dowie, Kelly Ann Marshall
School of Computing Science
University of Glasgow
United Kingdom

{leif, doug, kellym}@dcs.gla.ac.uk

Categories and Subject Descriptors:
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]:
Information Search and Retrieval
General Terms: Design, Human Factors
Keywords: Video Browser, Children

moves carousel down and around for different context

EXTENDED ABSTRACT

Nowadays children as young as two years old can easily interact with mobile touch screen devices and personal
computers to watch online videos through services such as
YouTube. However, such services present a number of challenges for young children (e.g. ﬁne grain gestures/interactions
and good typing/literacy skills). In addition, when children
use such services there is a risk that they may stumble upon
content that is inappropriate. YooSee1 is a web-based application developed using the PuppyIR framework [1] and
designed for children aged between two and six years old.
YooSee enables children to: (1) search and browse through
video content using an engaging, novel interaction paradigm,
and (2) be able to safely enjoy moderated video content.
The application was motivated by a desire to address the
issues that children have with text based searching. In [2],
Druin et al show that children face a number of problems
associated with formulating queries, such as: spelling, selecting the right words, and the use - or not - of natural
language. Additionally, in [3], it was found that children
prefer to browse through content. YooSee avoids the problems associated with querying by providing a novel interaction paradigm based around a globe of videos for children
to explore. Conceptually the globe can be thought of as a
series of carousels containing videos: where the interaction
paradigm allows two forms of browsing/scrolling:
1. in carousel to access similar and related content, and,
2. between carousels to access diﬀerent content.
Providing content around a globe allows the child to have
seamless and continuous interaction with the content provided i.e. as they with move around the carousels, or move
between carousels, they will eventually loop around the globe.
YooSee also adopts a minimilist interface in response to
concerns raised in [2] about the information overload experienced by children. Consequently, only a small part of the
content space is presented at once as shown in Figure 1,
1

See http://www.dcs.gla.ac.uk/access/yoosee/.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

play video

moves carousel around for similar content
Figure 1: YooSee in action.
where a 3x3 grid of thumbnails is presented except for the
central thumbnail which is larger and enables the child to
watch the embedded video inline. The child is able to navigate through the space browsing up or down, i.e. between
carousels, or left and right i.e. in carousel, or they can watch
the video that is currently in focus.
The moderation of the content is controlled by the parent/guardian of the child. This is accomplished via an administrative section of the application. In this section parent/guardians can manage the various carousels available
(adding content by searching for YouTube clips, adding /
deleting carousels, etc). While this step is manual, it provides the parent with complete control, and means they only
have to ﬁnd the items that their child likes once, rather
than repeatedly searching for the content that their child
enjoys. Once setup, children can enjoy their favourite content in a moderated and safe environment. In future work,
we will explore how children engage with this novel interaction paradigm, and whether they can easily and quickly
navigate to their desired content (over other possible interaction paradigms).

REFERENCES

[1] R. Glassey, T. Polajnar, and L.Azzopardi. PuppyIR Unleashed:
A Framework for Building Child-Oriented Information Services.
In In Proc. of the 11th Dutch-Belgian IR Workshop, 2011.
[2] A. Druin, E. Foss, L. Hatley, E. Golub, M. L. Guha, J. Fails,
and H. Hutchinson. How children search the internet with
keyword interfaces. In Proc. of the 8th Int. Conf. on
Interaction Design and Children, pages 89–96, 2009.
[3] A. Large, V. Nesset, and J. Beheshti. Children as information
seekers: what researchers tell us. New Review of Children’s
Literature and Librarianship, 14(2):121–140, 2009.
Acknowledgements: PuppyIR is funded by the EC’s FP7 20072013 under grant agreement no. 231507.

1017

