IR Paradigms in Computational Advertising
Andrei Z. Broder
Google
1600 Amphitheatre Parkway
Mountain View, CA 94043

broder@acm.org

ABSTRACT
The central problem in the emerging discipline of computational advertising is to ﬁnd the “best match” between a given
user in a given context and a suitable advertisement. The
context could be a user entering a query in a search engine
(“sponsored search”), a user reading a web page (“content
match” and “display ads”), a user streaming a movie, and
so on. In some situations, it is desirable to solve the “dual”
optimization problem: rather then ﬁnd the best ad given a
user in a context, the goal is to identify the “best audience”,
i.e. the most receptive set of users and/or the most suitable
contexts for a given advertising campaign. The information
about the user can vary from scarily detailed to practically
nil. The number of potential advertisements might be in the
billions. Thus, depending on the deﬁnition of “best match”
and “best audience” these problems lead to a variety of massive optimization problems, with complicated constraints,
and challenging data representation and access issues.
In general, the direct problem is solved in two stages: ﬁrst
a rough ﬁltering is used to identify a relatively small set of
ads to be considered as potential matches, followed by a
more sophisticated secondary ranking where economics considerations take center stage. Historically, the ﬁltering has
been conceived as a database selection problem, and was
done using simple Boolean formulae, for instance, in sponsored search the ﬁlter could be “all ads that provide a speciﬁc
bid for the present query string or a subset of it”. Similarly
for the dual problem (audience deﬁnition) for, say, a sports
car ad, the ﬁlter could be “all males in California, aged 40
or less”.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

1019

This “database approach” for the direct problem has been
recently supplanted by an “IR approach” based on a similarity search between a carefully constructed query that captures the advertising opportunity and an annotated document corpus that represents the potential ads. Similarly, in
the dual problem, the newer approach is to devise an eﬃcient
and eﬀective representation of the users, then form a query
that represents a prototypical ideal user, and ﬁnally ﬁnd the
users most similar to the prototype. The aim of this talk is
to discuss the penetration of the IR paradigms in computational advertising and present some research challenges and
opportunities in this area of enormous economic importance.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.5 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Online Information Services—Web based services; H.4.3 [Communications Applications]: Information browsers; I.7.5 [Document and Text Processing]: Document Capture—Document analysis

General Terms
Algorithms, Design, Economics, Performance

Keywords
Computational advertising, Similarity search, Audience targeting

