Political Search Trends
Ingmar Weber
Yahoo! Research Barcelona

ingmar@yahoo-inc.com

Venkata Rama Kiran
Garimella
Yahoo! Research Barcelona

gvrkiran@yahoo-inc.com

ABSTRACT

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.5 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Online Information
Services

Keywords
query log mining, political blogs, partisanship, fact-checking

WHAT IT DOES

3.

Political Search Trends (PST)1 analyzes anonymized web search
queries submitted to Yahoo! that lead to clicks on political blogs.
For a given week it shows trending political queries. E.g., the query
“9 11 coloring book”2 was found to be trending during Aug. 29Sep. 4. As its main feature PST assigns a (fractional) political
leaning to queries, such as “cost of obamacare” which is determined to be 99% right-leaning. Finally, it links queries to factchecked statements on politifact.com such that “obama’s aunt” is
matched to http://tinyurl.com/politifact-aboutobamas-aunt.

2.

borra@uva.nl

with the number of results when the search term (i) “political” or
(ii) “celebrity” is added. In the first case, the difference must not
be too large, and in the second it must not be too small. These
checks remove a small number of queries such as “whitney houston’s death”, which lead to clicks on several borderline political
blogs. Trends are detected using relative increases in search volume [2]. Queries are annotated as left- or right-leaning, on a 0-to-1
scale, according to the fraction of times a query leads to clicks on a
particular leaning. To limit volume-induced leaning biases, we use
normalized volumes where, conceptually, each leaning is given the
same number of “votes” in a given week. To address the problem
of sparsity, where a query with a small number of queries could
prematurely be assigned an extreme leaning, we use appropriate
smoothing. Queries are matched to fact-checked statements by first
indexing both the statements, usually one sentence, and Politifact’s
short summary and then performing basic term-based matching, allowing incomplete fuzzy matches for long queries.

We present Political Search Trends, a browser based web search
analysis tool that (i) assigns a political leaning to web search queries,
(ii) detects trending political queries in a given week, and (iii) links
search queries to fact-checked statements. In terms of methodology, it showcases the power of analyzing queries leading to clicks
on selected, annotated web sites of interest.

1.

Erik Borra
University of Amsterdam
Amsterdam, Netherlands

RELATED DEMOS

The tool most closely related to PST was Political Insights4 , also
developed by us and now obsolete. The methodology for assigning
a leaning to a query is the same for both tools [3]. However, PST includes the notions of time and “trending” and shows results for continuously updated fresh data. In terms of write-up, [3] focuses on
the methodology and findings derived from the data, whereas here
we focus on the demo. Apart from Political Insights, we are not
aware of any “political” web search analysis tool. General search
analysis tools5 could be used to obtain historic volume information
and a geographical distribution as well as, for Yahoo! Clues, demographic information about the users issuing the particular query.
However, such tools do not present the political leaning of a query
and the queries to explore need to be pre-defined by the user. PST
on the other hand provides the user with a list of queries to explore
for a given week or for a given search string. Media Cloud6 uses
partisan blogs but does not align them with search logs.

HOW IT WORKS

The starting point of PST is a set of blogs annotated as either
left-leaning (387) or right-leaning (644). These labels are obtained
by combining the work of Benkler and Shaw [1] with the Wonkosphere3 blog directory. For the demo only queries leading to clicks
on these blogs are considered. Obvious navigational queries are
detected using string similarity and removed from consideration.
Similarly, queries that within a given week only lead to clicks on
one or two blogs are removed as they are generally not wide political issues. To improve the precision of detecting “political” queries,
we compare the original number of web search results for a query

4.

REFERENCES

[1] Y. Benkler and A. Shaw. A tale of two blogospheres:
Discursive practices on the left and right, 2010.
http://tinyurl.com/Benker-and-Shaw.
[2] I. Subasic and C. Castillo. The effects of query bursts on web
search. In Web Intelligence, 2010.
[3] I. Weber, V. R. K. Garimella, and E. Borra. Mining web query
logs to analyze political issues. In Web Science, 2012.

1
http://politicalsearchtrends.sandbox.yahoo.
com
2
http://abcn.ws/MyqKgU
3
http://wonkosphere.com/directory.htm

4

Screenshots available at http://bit.ly/KM9ieA.
http://yhoo.it/lKSQ7t or http://bit.ly/tBzI
6
http://www.mediacloud.org/

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

5

1012

