Pictune: Situational Music Recommendation from
Geotagged Pictures
Ke Chen

Gang Chen

Lidan Shou

Fei Xia

College of Computer Science and Technology
Zhejiang University
Hangzhou, China

{chenk, cg, should}@zju.edu.cn

Net category to expand T so that more emotional terms
are added and their weights be boosted [1]. T will then be
mapped onto the music tag vocabulary relying on a distributional similarity tool [3], which produces another tag vector
T  in the music tag space. T  will then be used to retrieve
the music via tag-space similarity.

Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.3.3 Information
Systems: Information Retrieval
Keywords: Music Recommendation, Geo-tag, Image

1.

xiafei648822481@163.com

EXTENDED ABSTRACT

We propose a music recommendation prototype named
Pictune. Pictune utilizes location-based image retrieval and
other Web services to recommend music for users virtually located at any position where such services are available.
Our study is theoretically supported by two psychological
ﬁndings. First, the need for music is driven by diverse motives, such as the leisure, informative, self-educational or
experiential motives [2]. Interestingly, such motives are also
spotted in photography. Second, the perception of the environment can signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the expectation of music
[4]. For example, when a person sees a landmark, its concept may be stimulated, evoking the expectation of other
connection related to it, such as music and pictures. On the
other hand, the melody of a song can facilitate learning and
recall of the situation.
The main objective of this work is to develop a mobile Web
application which acquires the user’s ambience and retrieves
music by it. The ambience of a user, as she accesses the
application, is deﬁned by her location, time-of-day (TOD),
day-of-year (DOY), and the weather. These elements can
be easily acquired from either the terminal or the Web. The
main challenge is to explore the correlation between user
ambience and the online rich photos, which are associated
with numerous tags describing not only the facts (such as
the ambience and the object being shot) but also subjective
feelings, sensings, perceptions, and intuitions.
Pictune contains the following components: (1) A music
database where each music is associated with a set of tags.
(2) An image database indexed by ambience vector. Each
ambience is associated with a set of tagged images. These
data are retrieved from Flickr API and an online weather
service. The components of the ambience vector are represented in discretized form for ease of computation. (3) A
tag-by-ambience matrix Mta (precomputed from the image
database) where each element indicates the weight of a tag
for a particular ambience. Given the current ambience of a
new query, we ﬁrst compute a vector of relevant tags (denoted by T ) with weights. Then we perform an emotion
enhancement process on T , which uses an emotional Word-

Figure 1: The recommendation results of Pictune
Figure 1 illustrates a Pictune screen with a few points-ofinterest in a browser. The main window displays the recommended songs in the pop-ups. Each pop-up also contains a
tag cloud showing a part of the T vector and a representative
photo which is associated with the most occurrences of tags
in T . The left side-bar lists all points being recommended,
each showing the respective pictures and tags selected by
the ambience. The bottom-bar contains a large button for
music recommendation and the music player.
Pictune is distinguished from existing music recommendation systems as it exploits people’s situational stimuli contained in social media. Hence, Pictune is not only a gadget
to facilitate music discovery, but also a situational audio
bridge toward the perception and emotion of the others.
Acknowledgments The work is supported by National Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 60970124, 61170034).

2. REFERENCES

[1] Wordnet-aﬀect.
http://wndomains.fbk.eu/wnaﬀect.html.
[2] C. Gibson and J. Connell. Music and tourism: on the
road again. Channel View Publications, 2005.
[3] P. Kolb. Disco: A multilingual database of
distributionally similar words. In Proc. KONVENS,
2008.
[4] W. Wallace. Memory for music: Eﬀect of melody on
recall of text. Jnl. of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 20:1471–1485, 1994.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

1011

