Sketch-based Image Similarity Search with a
Pen and Paper Interface
Ihab Al Kabary

Heiko Schuldt

Databases and Information Systems Group
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
University of Basel, Switzerland

ihab.alkabary@unibas.ch, heiko.schuldt@unibas.ch
ABSTRACT
We present a novel and innovative user interface for queryby-sketching based image retrieval that exploits emergent
interactive paper and digital pen technology. Users can
draw sketches with a digital pen on interactive paper in a
user-friendly way. The pen is able to capture the stroke
vectors and to interactively stream them to the underlying
content-based image retrieval (CBIR) system via the pen’s
Bluetooth interface. We present the integration of interactive paper/digital pen technology with QbS, our CBIR
system tailored to Query-by-Sketching, and we demonstrate
the use of the paper and pen interface together with QbS
for three diﬀerent collections: MIRFLICKR-25K, a cartoon
collection, and a collection of medieval paper watermarks.

Figure 1: Execution of Pen-based CBIR Query

2. PEN AND PAPER INTERFACE
Digital pens are designed for drawing on normal paper
on which a proprietary Anoto dot pattern is printed. The
pens which are equipped with an infrared LED camera can
localize the position on paper by reading a 6×6 dot area on
paper (approx. 1.8×1.8 mm in size). Each dot is subject
to one of four displacements from a regular grid position,
leading to 436 diﬀerent combinations of the 6×6 dot area,
which is read to identify the pen tip coordinates. The pens
store the pattern information in the form of pen stroke data,
which are continuous curves made up of coordinates and
which are interactively transmitted to the back-end CBIR
application (our QbS system, see Figure 1) via Bluetooth.
The QbS system exploits angular radial partitioning for
the extraction of features in the user-provided sketch, and
also supports the image distortion model and edge histogram
descriptors. This combination provides several highly relevant invariances that allow the query sketch to slightly deviate from the searched image in terms of rotation, translation, relative size, and/or unknown objects in the background. The pen and paper interface for the QbS system
has been subject to evaluations and user studies [1] with
three diﬀerent collections: i.) the MIRFLICKR-25K photo
collection, ii.) a collection of cartoon images, and iii.) a
collection of medieval paper watermarks which are used in
the humanities to date ancient documents.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: User
Interfaces; H.3.3 [Information Storage And Retrieval]:
Information Search and Retrieval

Keywords
digital pen, interactive paper, query-by-sketch, CBIR

1.

QUERY-BY-SKETCHING

Content-based image retrieval (CBIR) allows to search in
image databases even when no descriptive metadata is attached to the individual objects. To overcome the problem
of ﬁnding appropriate query objects in CBIR, Query-bySketching allows users to contribute sketches (mainly edge
drawings) as query objects. However, Query-by-Sketching
has suﬀered in the past from the limitations of existing user
interfaces. Drawing sketches with a mouse is a highly inexact method, and even using graphic tablets involves constantly looking away from the hand. Methods that combine
the functionalities of graphic tablets with those of a monitor (e.g., the iPad) are best suited for rather simple gestures
and thus do not meet the precision necessary for providing
exact sketches. Therefore, the intuitively most promising
approach to drawing sketches is to just use a (conventional)
pen and paper interface [2].

3. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work has been partly supported by the Swiss National
Science Foundation, projects PAD-IR and MM-DocTable.

4. REFERENCES

[1] R. Kreuzer, M. Springmann, I. A. Kabary, and H. Schuldt.
An Interactive Paper and Digital Pen Interface for
Query-by-Sketch Image Retrieval. In Proc. ECIR’12, pages
317–328, Barcelona, Spain, Apr. 2012.
[2] G. Kurtenbach. Pen-based Computing. ACM Crossroads,
16(4):14–20, 2010.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

1014

