Entity Sentiment Extraction Using Text Ranking
John O’Neil

Attivio, Inc.
275 Grove Street
Newton, MA USA

joneil@attivio.com

ABSTRACT

like to be able to distinguish the article’s opinions about
each entity, beyond the overall sentiment of the document
or the mere presence of entities in it.
Before we extract entity sentiment, we need to be able
to extract entities and to have a sentiment model that associates tokens (and optionally phrases) with a positive or
negative sentiment.
There are many approaches to entity extraction. Almost
any type of entity extraction can be used with the algorithm
presented in this paper. For the experiments reported here,
we combined the results of a dictionary-based entity extractor and a statistical entity extractor. For increased accuracy,
entity mention tracking can be used, as well as pronoun resolution. When multiple references to the same entity are
discovered, we combine their sentiment contexts.
For the algorithm presented here, the sentiment model
must be able to map words (and optionally longer n-grams)
to a sentiment score. Any approach that yields such a
model, like [3], will be satisfactory. In particular, we used
a standard supervised document classifier trained on documents labeled positive and negative to derive the sentiment
weights.
To blend the sentiment scores in the neighborhood of entities, we use the TextRank algorithm described in [2]. Inspired by Page Rank and similar graph-based algorithms, it
describes a general approach to any natural language task
that can be reduced to a graph.
For the entity sentiment problem, we make the sentimentbearing words and all the entities into graph vertices. When
any sentiment-bearing word is with a configurable distance
from a entity (or one of its mentions), an edge is added to
the graph, with the sentiment weight being the edge weight.
Then, we use a version of power iteration, which finds the
eigenvector with the greatest eigenvalue. When power iteration has converged, we read the final sentiment weights off
the entity vertices.

Entity extraction and sentiment classification are among
the most common types of information derived from documents, but the problem of directly associating entities and
sentiment has received less attention. We use TextRank
on a graph linking entities and sentiment-laden words and
phrases. We extract from the resulting eigenvector the final
sentiment weights of the entities. We then explore the algorithm’s performance and accuracy, compared to a baseline.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Text Mining

General Terms
Algorithms, Experimentation

Keywords
Entity extraction, sentiment classification

1.

OVERVIEW

Entity extraction and sentiment classification are both the
focus of extensive research and of numerous applications.
However, there’s been less research into assigning sentiment
to entities directly based on their context within documents.
Most documents are neither uniformly positive or uniformly
negative, nor are they usually about only one thing. Consider the following snippet (from [1]):
I already hated AT&T. It’s my fixed telephony
and internet provider (because it has something
of a monopoly on such services). I go through
periods where my internet becomes intermittent,
which AT&T refuses to acknowledge. . . I love love
love my iPhone. It’s my mini-computer on the
go. I use it for texting, social sharing, photography, editing, keeping track of my calendar, storing contacts, finding directions, listening to music and podcasts, watching videos, reading, and
blogging. Sometimes, I even make a phone call.

2. REFERENCES
[1] Cosette. Using my beloved iPhone in Australia.
http://stumbledownunder.com/2012/01/07/
using-my-beloved-iphone-in-australia/.
[2] R. Mihalcea and P. Tarau. Textrank: Bringing order
into texts. In D. Lin and D. Wu, editors, Proceedings of
EMNLP 2004, 2004.
[3] B. Pang, L. Lee, and S. Vaithyanathan. Thumbs up?
Sentiment classification using machine learning
techniques. In Proceedings of EMNLP 2002, pages
79–86, 2002.

This document doesn’t have a strong, consistent sentiment, but the entities iPhone and AT&T do. Clearly, we’d
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

1024

