CloudSearch and the
Democratization of Information Retrieval
[Extended Abstract]
Daniel E. Rose
A9.com

danrose@a9.com
ABSTRACT

1. AMAZON CLOUDSEARCH

Amazon CloudSearch is a new hosted search service, built
on top of many cloud-based AWS services, and based on the
same technology that powers search on Amazon’s retail sites.
Because of its ease of conﬁguration and scalability, CloudSearch represents the next step in the democratization of information retrieval. This democratization process, increasing access to search for both end users and potential search
providers, has continued over several decades, through technologies like early online metered search services, enterprise
search software, web search, and open source search tools.
CloudSearch further reduces barriers to entry, allowing a
person or organization to basically say “make my content
searchable” and have it happen automatically. CloudSearch
may also oﬀer an opportunity to overcome the stagnation
that has occurred in search user experiences over the past
15 years. When you no longer need to be a search expert
to make your content available, you’re not stuck with ten
blue links. Instead, you can focus on providing the kind of
interaction that makes sense for your application and your
users. CloudSearch enables a ﬂowering of search applications that need not be tied to the web, and an opportunity
to explore new ways of interacting with information retrieval
technology.

Amazon CloudSearch is a new hosted search service from
AWS (currently in beta as of this writing). CloudSearch is
based on the product search technology developed by A9 for
use by Amazon. This engine was designed from the ground
up with semistructured data in mind, including support for
faceted metadata and numeric range searches. And since
tf·idf-style text matching isn’t always the most important
ranking feature for many real-world applications, CloudSearch provides relevance functions based on a conﬁgurable
mix of query-dependent and query-independent features. In
addition, the engine was designed for memory-resident indexes, with internal data structures that take advantage of
this architecture.
CloudSearch relies on many proven AWS services, not only
for raw computation (EC2) and storage (S3), but also for important process components. For example, Elastic MapReduce (EMR) is used for index construction, Simple Workﬂow
Service (SWF) for coordinating customer actions, and Elastic Load Balancing (ELB) for routing traﬃc.

2. IMPACT ON SEARCH ACCESS
The history of information retrieval is one of increased access, or what we call the democratization of search. This
process has two aspects: increased access by end-users and
increased access for potential search providers. New generations of search technology were often accompanied by improvements in one or the other of these kinds of access.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search and Retrieval; H.3.4 [Information Storage
and Retrieval]: Systems and Software; C.2.4 [ComputerCommunication Networks]: Distributed Systems—Cloud
computing; H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: User Interfaces

• Online services. Search ﬁrst became commercially available in the early 1970s with online services like DIALOG and ORBIT, which provided access to important
research collections. These services charged end users
by the hour — $50 per hour was a typical fee — and
in some cases required the customer to rent a special
terminal installed in his or her oﬃce. Due to these limitations, the services were used by only a few people,
typically in law oﬃces or university research libraries.

General Terms
Human Factors, Experimentation

Keywords

• Enterprise search. The 1980s and 1990s saw the appearance of search engine products such as Verity Topic,
Excalibur RetrievalWare, and Fulcrum SearchServer
that for the ﬁrst time let an organization make its own
chosen set of data searchable. Due to both the expense
of the software (often tens or hundreds of thousands of
dollars per instance per year), the large servers needed
to run it, and the skilled people needed to install, conﬁgure, and maintain it, customers tended to be limited
to large businesses.

cloud search, cloud computing, access to search, search interfaces

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

1022

3. IMPACT ON USER EXPERIENCE

• Web search. The rise of web search in the mid-to-late
1990s brought search to the general public for the ﬁrst
time. Eventually, end users could search the web from
nearly any location and at no incremental cost. While
this was a huge step forward in terms of end-user access
to search, in some sense it oﬀered less ﬂexibility and
control to organizations who had searchable content.

The early days of commercial search were characterized
by the use of text-based interfaces and complex Boolean
query syntax. As computers shifted from command-line to
graphical user interfaces, interaction with search systems became much simpler. The widespread adoption of unstructured queries also made a huge diﬀerence in search usability.
Unfortunately, there has been little further improvement in
search interfaces, at least those available to the general public, since 1995.
In the intervening years, a typical user’s computing power
has increased by more than a factor of 50 and her bandwidth
by a factor of 200. Operating systems such as Mac OS X
and Windows 7 provide dramatically richer interaction, with
photorealistic graphics, animation, and so on. Internet services allow multiuser video chat, immersive game environments, and streaming HD video. Yet search interfaces, and
web search interfaces in particular, have barely changed.
The reasons for this are complex, but one of them is that
the web search market quickly became dominated by a small
number of players who stayed with the now-familiar design.
Many users have never seen a search engine other than a
web search engine and assume this is just the way search is
supposed to work.
CloudSearch oﬀers an opportunity to overcome this stagnation. First, it dramatically lowers the barrier of entry
for a person or organization that wants to provide search
as part of their application or service. A small business or
organization that didn’t have the resources to oﬀer search
before now can. So there will be an explosion of new applications and content sources, ﬁlling small niches other than general web search and aimed at a variety of devices. Second,
search providers no longer need to be search experts. Instead, they’ll be experts in their own applications and their
own ways of interacting with their content. Search interfaces will be designed by and for photographers and music
lovers and literature scholars, and the results will reﬂect the
diﬀerent needs of their diverse domains.

• Open source search. The past 10 years have seen the
growth and adoption of high-quality open source search
tools such as Lucene/Solr and Indri in a variety of domains. Like enterprise search, these tools allow their
users to decide what data to make searchable, but
without the licensing fee. However, they still require
a fair degree of skill to conﬁgure and maintain, as well
as hardware to run on.
CloudSearch represents the next stage in the process of democratization, particularly for potential search providers.
With CloudSearch, people or organizations who want to
make their data searchable no longer have to choose between putting it on the web and becoming search engine
experts. Instead, they can essentially say “make this collection searchable,” and the service does the rest. There are
several attributes of CloudSearch that make this possible:
• Ease of conﬁguration. To set up a CloudSearch domain, clients provide data in XML or similar format,
answer a few questions about the structure of the data
via a simple dashboard interface, and they are done.
In some cases CloudSearch can automatically deduce
the correct conﬁguration from a sample of documents.
If the client wants to experiment with the conﬁguration — for example, to change which ﬁelds should be
facets or how stemming is applied — this can be easily
done from the dashboard, without the need to upload
documents again.
• No hardware or software management. This is one of
the most obvious beneﬁts of a cloud-based solution,
but it is no less important for being so. The amount
of eﬀort required to install and operate a stable service running on one’s own hardware is nontrivial; keeping it up 24 x 7 while protecting against a variety of
threats, both malicious and natural, requires a serious investment. CloudSearch customers don’t have to
worry about these issues. Furthermore, CloudSearch
automatically upgrades the system with new software
without incurring any downtime.
• Scalability and Elasticity. Perhaps the most important beneﬁt of CloudSearch is its ability to automatically scale in multiple dimensions. As the size of the
data grows, the CloudSearch service will automatically
repartition the index across multiple servers, providing
horizontal parallelism. As the amount of query trafﬁc grows, the service will automatically replicate the
query servers, providing vertical parallelism. Furthermore, the elastic nature of the service means servers
will be added at peak times to handle the increased
traﬃc, then removed later so customers aren’t paying
for capacity they don’t need.

1023

