BReK12: A Book Recommender for K-12 Users
Maria Soledad Pera

Yiu-Kai Ng

Computer Science Department
Brigham Young University
Provo, Utah, U.S.A.

Computer Science Department
Brigham Young University
Provo, Utah, U.S.A.

mpera@cs.byu.edu

Ng@compsci.byu.edu

similarity to identify books appealing to U , BReK12 determines the readability level of books to be recommended
based on well-known readability formulas.
We have conducted an empirical study to verify that by
considering the readability level of books and its users, in
addition to the content and item-item similarity measures,
BReK12 recommends books that are more suitable for K-12
users than the ones suggested by existing recommenders.

ABSTRACT
Ideally, students in K-12 grade levels can turn to book recommenders to locate books that match their interests. Existing book recommenders, however, fail to take into account
the readability levels of their users, and hence their recommendations may be unsuitable for the users. To address
this issue, we introduce BReK12, a recommender that targets K-12 users and prioritizes the reading level of its users
in suggesting books of interest. Empirical studies conducted
using the Bookcrossing dataset show that BReK12 outperforms a number of existing recommenders (developed for
general users) in identifying books appealing to K-12 users.

2. THE PROPOSED RECOMMENDER
BReK12 recommends books for a K-12 user U based on
U ’s interest on a given book B and the following measures:
Content Similarity: BReK12 computes the content
similarity between B and each candidate book CB to be
considered for recommendation, denoted CSim (CB, B), as
deﬁned in Equation 1. B (CB, respectively) is represented
as a set of keywords1 SB (SCB , respectively) that appear
in either the title, description, or tag cloud of B (CB, respectively). Each keyword in the set is associated with its
corresponding frequency of occurrence in the title, description, and tag cloud of the book. The title of B (CB, respectively) characterizes its subject matter, whereas its tag
cloud captures user-deﬁned keywords posted under social
bookmarking sites that describe the content of B (CB, respectively) and its description provides an overview of its
content, which is often created by its author(s).
n m
i=1
j=1 wcf (CBi , Bj ) × #CBi × #Bj
CSim (CB, B) =
n
(1)
where n (m, respectively) is the number of distinct keywords
in SCB (SB , respectively), CBi (Bj , respectively) is a keyword in SCB (SB , respectively), wcf (CBi , Bj ) is the word
correlation factor of CBi and Bj [4], and #CBi (#Bj , respectively) denotes the frequency of occurrence of CBi in
SCB (Bj in SB , respectively).
#CBi (#Bj , respectively) is considered in computing CSim
(CB, B), since the larger #CBi (#Bj , respectively) is, the
more signiﬁcant CBi (Bj , respectively) is in characterizing
the content of CB (B, respectively). BReK12 employs wcf s
to analyze the content similarity between CB and B, since
they reﬂect keywords in SCB that are analogous to, but do
not exactly match, the keywords in SB .
Item-item Similarity: BReK12 considers the itemitem similarity between B and CB, denoted IISim (CB, B),
in making recommendations. In computing IISim (CB, B),

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Information
ﬁltering, retrieval models

Keywords
Recommendation system, book, readability, K-12

1.

INTRODUCTION

Reading, an essential skill required for acquiring knowledge, is an integral part of the educational system. It is
imperative to encourage the reading habit of K-12 students
early on, since research studies have conﬁrmed the enormous
inﬂuence of reading on students’ development as learners
and members of the society [7]. Finding books that children/youth are interested in, however, is not a trivial task
due to the diversity of topics covered in books, needless to
say the huge volume of books available these days.
A recommendation system on books that assists children/
youths in ﬁnding books of interest to them is a valuable asset
to the age group. Existing book recommenders, however, are
developed with a general audience in mind and ignore the
literacy skill of each individual user. As a result, even if
(the topic of) a book B recommended to a user U matches
U ’s interests, B might include complex (basic, respectively)
content, which is beyond (below, respectively) the literary
level of U and thus is unappealing, i.e., irrelevant, to U .
To address the design fault on excluding the literary issue in existing book recommendation systems, we introduce
BReK12, a unique recommender tailored to K-12 users. Besides considering diverse content descriptors and item-item
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

1
From now on, unless stated otherwise, (key)words/tags refer to non-stop, stemmed (key)words/tags.

1037

Table 1: Performance metrics computed for Cos, T V S, and
BReK12 on 14,014 user-book pairs

B (CB, respectively) is represented as an u-dimensional vector, where u is the number of users who have bookmarked
either B or CB at a social bookmarking site such that users
who bookmarked B (CB, respectively) are assigned a “1”
in the corresponding components of the vector. The cosine
metric is applied on the vectors of B and CB so that the
larger the number of users who have bookmarked both B
and CB is, the more likely CB is a relevant recommendation for U [1], as indicated by the metric.
Readability Similarity: BReK12 recommends books
that correlate with the reading level of U (inferred by the
readability level of B). The readability level of a book can be
determined using various readability formulas, e.g., SMOG
or Fog [3, 5]. Each formula measures a diﬀerent aspect of a
text T , such as the length of each word in T or the popularity
of words in T , and yields a diﬀerent readability score for T .
BReK12 considers multiple readability formulas in tandem
to avoid any bias on using one or the other formula. A
combined score, which reﬂects the similarity in readability
levels between B and CB, can be computed by applying the
Stanford Certainty Factor on a number of readability scores.
RSim (CB, B) =

RF1 + ... + RFn
1 − M in{RF1 , ..., RFn }

Recommenders
Cos
TV S
BReK12

P @10
0.12
0.17
0.68

M RR
0.26
0.32
0.81

nDCG
0.30
0.36
0.83

recommend books for comparison purposes. While T V S
represents the content of each book as a TF-IDF tag proﬁle
vector, Cos considers the weighted frequency of each keyword in the description or title of the book. T V S and Cos
compute the similarity of books using the cosine metric.
As shown in Table 1, BReK12 outperforms other existing recommenders considered in the empirical study. Based
on the computed Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR), on the average, BReK12 users are required to browse through close
1
= 1.23) recommended book before locating
to one (∼
= 0.81
a relevant one, whereas users employing T V S and Cos are
1
required to scan through close to three (∼
= 3.12) and
= 0.32
1
=
3.84)
recommended
books,
respectively.
In
four (∼
= 0.26
addition, the P recision@1 (P @1) achieved by BReK12 is
signiﬁcantly higher than the P @1 value achieved by T V S
or Cos. The same applies to the P recision@10 (P @10)
values. The high Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain
(nDCG) score of BReK12 indicates that BReK12 is more
eﬀective than Cos and T V S in retrieving relevant books to
be recommended and positioning them higher in the list of
suggested books.

(2)

i (CB)|)
(1 ≤ i ≤ n) is the dewhere RFi = 1 − (|fi (B)−f
M ax
gree of similarity between the readability levels of B and
CB computed using the ith readability formula fi , fi (B)
(fi (CB), respectively) is the readability score of B (CB,
respectively), and M ax, which is a normalization factor, is
the largest diﬀerence between the readability scores of B and
each candidate book to be considered for recommendation.
Ranking: BReK12 computes a ranking score for each
candidate book CB with respect to B and recommends to
U the top-10 candidate books with the highest Rank scores.

4. CONCLUSION
We have introduced BReK12, a book recommender tailored to K-12 users. Unlike existing recommenders, BReK12
explicitly considers the reading level of a user U and locates
books matching not only a book U is interested in, but most
importantly, the reading ability of U . We have empirically
veriﬁed that BReK12 outperforms various recommenders in
suggesting books suitable for users in K-12 grade levels.

Rank(CB, B) =
CSim (CB, B) + IISim (CB, B) + RSim (CB, B)
(3)
1−M in{CSim (CB, B), IISim (CB, B), RSim (CB, B)}

3.

P @1
0.18
0.23
0.75

EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

5. REFERENCES

Dataset and evaluation strategy: To evaluate the performance of BReK12, we use a portion of the Bookcrossing
dataset (informatik.uni-freiburg.de/˜cziegler/BX). The resultant dataset includes 1,173 distinct K-12 users and 8,737
distinct books bookmarked by the users. The description
and tag cloud of each book (not provided by the dataset)
were extracted from Alibris.com and Librarything.com, respectively. The readability levels computed by using the
Flesch-Kincaid and Fog readability formulas for each book
in the dataset are available on Amazon.com.
Since BReK12 suggests books for a user based on his/her
interest on a particular book, we evaluate the recommendations generated by BReK12 for each of the 14,014 userbook pairs in the resultant dataset. We treat a recommendation as relevant for a user-book pair, if the book has been
bookmarked by the user on Bookcrossing and non-relevant
otherwise, which is a common protocol in evaluating a recommender.
Empirical Study: To validate the eﬀectiveness of BReK12, we compare its performance with two newly-introduced
recommenders, T V S [2] and Cos [6], which were originally
developed as document recommenders and were adapted to

[1] T. Bogers and A. van den Bosch. Fusing
recommendations for social bookmarking websites.
IJEC, 15(3):33–75, 2011.
[2] Z. Guan, C. Wang, J. Bu, C. Chen, K. Yang, D. Cai,
and X. Hei. Document recommendation in social
tagging services. In WWW, pages 391–400, 2010.
[3] R. Gunning. The Technique of Clear Writing.
McGraw-Hill, 1952.
[4] J. Koberstein and Y.-K. Ng. Using word clusters to
detect similar web documents. In KSEM, pages
215–228, 2006.
[5] G. McLaughlin. Smog grading: A new readability
formula. Journal of Reading, 12:639–646, 1969.
[6] C. Nascimento, A. Laender, A. da Silva, and M. G.-.
calves. A source independent framework for research
paper recommendation. In JCDL, pages 391–400, 2011.
[7] R. Slavin, C. Lake, B. Chambers, A. Cheung, and
S. Davis. Eﬀective reading programs for the elementary
grades: A best-evidence synthesis. Review of
Educational Research, 79(4):1391–1466, 2009.

1038

