Dependency Trigram Model for Social Relation
Extraction from News Articles
Maengsik Choi

Harksoo Kim

W. Bruce Croft

Kangwon National University
1 Gangwondaehak-gil,
Chuncheon-si, Gangwon-do, 200701, Republic of Korea
mschoi@kangwon.ac.kr

Kangwon National University
1 Gangwondaehak-gil,
Chuncheon-si, Gangwon-do, 200701, Republic of Korea
nlpdrkim@kangwon.ac.kr

Dept. of Computer Science
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA, 01003, USA
croft@cs.umass.edu

trees. To resolve this problem, we propose a dependency trigram
kernel to efficiently compute the structural similarity between
pairs of dependency trees.

ABSTRACT
We propose a kernel-based model to automatically extract social
relations such as economic relations and political relations
between two people from news articles. To determine whether
two people are structurally associated with each other, the
proposed model uses an SVM (support vector machine) tree
kernel based on trigrams of head-dependent relations between
them. In the experiments with the automatic content extraction
(ACE) corpus and a Korean news corpus, the proposed model
outperformed the previous systems based on SVM tree kernels
even though it used more shallow linguistic knowledge.

Table 1. Categories and examples of social relations
Category
EXCHANGE
CRITICIZE
MEET
CONGRATULATE
CONTACT
ASSERT

Categories and Subject Descriptors

2. DEPENDENCY TRIGRAM MODEL

I.2.7 [Artificial Intelligence]: Natural Language Processing

Given n words w1,n in a sentence S describing social relations, let
wi denote the i-th word in the sentence, and let “wiwk” denote
that wi is dependent on wk. Then, we can define a dependency
trigram set ST as shown in Equation (1).

Keywords
Social Relation Extraction, Dependency Trigram
Dependency Kernel, Support Vector Machine

Example
Present, offer a bribe
Blame, make a reckless, censure
Dispute, introduce, interview
Celebrate, defend, encourage, praise
Call, mail, contact, replay
Request, ask pardon

Kernel,

ST  ST  ST ,
1

(1)

2

where ST  {wi  wk  w j | i  j},

1. INTRODUCTION

1

ST  {wl  wk  wr | l  r and wl , wr  child ( wk )}

In natural language documents, a huge number of social relations
are described. Automatic extraction of these social relations from
documents would be highly beneficial to social network analysis
(SNA) studies on business economics, public administration, and
political science. In this paper, we propose a model to
automatically extract social relations between people from news
articles using support vector machines (SVMs). Table 1 shows the
categories of social relations that the proposed model aims to
extract from news articles. The proposed model first selects
sentences describing social relations between people’s names (the
names are automatically recognized by a conventional named
entity tagger). Then, it classifies the selected sentences into one of
the six categories in Table 1.

2

In Equation (1), wk is the first common head word of wi and wj.
Further, wl and wr are child nodes that are both directly dependent
on wk. Thus, we can design a dependency kernel function that
uses the defined dependency trigrams as function inputs, as shown
in Equation (2).
K ( A, B ) 
n

 max(s( A , B ), s( A , B ),..., s( A , B ),..., s( A , B
i
T

i
T

1
T

i
T

2
T

j
T

i
T

m
T

))

(2)

i 1

n

In Equation (2), A and B are input sentences of the kernel function
i
K that consist of n and m dependency trigrams, respectively. AT
j
is the i-th dependency trigram for sentence A, whereas BT is the
j-th dependency trigram for sentence B. The similarity score
i
j
s ( AT , BT ) is calculated using the weighted sum of the common
i
j
attributes between AT and BT , as shown in Equation (3).

Recently, kernel-based models based on SVMs have shown good
performance on this task. The shortest path kernel model [3]
showed the best results in terms of both computational complexity
and performance [2]. However, it exhibited low recall rates owing
to hard-matching constraints (i.e., two sub-trees should share the
same depth or length) between the comparisons of two target sub-

r

s ( ATi , BTj )    wq N q ( pos ( ATi ), pos ( BTj ))

(3)

pos q 1

In Equation (3), pos indicates the positions (left, center, or right)
i
of each node in a dependency trigram. In other words, left ( AT ) ,

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

1047

i

i

path kernel [6]. All systems first selected sentences with relations
and then discriminated among the top five classes (i.e., AT,
NEAR, PART, ROLE, and SOCIAL) in the ACE corpus. The
Bunescu system and the Wang system use named entity
categories and semantic code as input features. As shown in Table
4, the proposed model exhibited a considerably higher recall rate
than the previous systems. Consequently, their high recall rates
resulted in the best F1 scores. Table 4 shows the performance of
the proposed model in the Korean news corpus.

center ( AT ) and right ( AT ) are the left, center, and right node of
i

the dependency trigram AT , respectively. Further, Nq(X) is a
binary function that returns 0 or 1 depending on whether the q-th
i
j
attribute of AT is the same as that of. BT . Table 2 shows the
attributes used for the comparison of two dependency trigrams.
Table 2. Attributes and their meanings
Attribute
Lexeme
Part-of-speech
Gramm. role

Meaning
The surface form (e.g., money, give)
The morphological category (e.g., noun, verb)
The grammatical category (e.g., sub, obj)

Table 4. Performance in the Korean news corpus
Model
Bunescu
Proposed model

As shown in Table 2, we do not use high-level semantic
knowledge such as named entity categories and semantic codes in
order to increase domain portability and decrease the effort
related to a language change. The weight value wq for the q-th of
the r attributes is assigned according to Equation (4).
wq  1 

Eq  MinE
MaxE  MinE

, where Eq   p ( x) log 2 p ( x)

(4)

xq

We presented a social relation extraction model based on a
dependency trigram kernel of SVM. In the experiments, we found
that the newly designed kernel could relax the hard-matching
constraints of the Bunescu system. Moreover, the proposed model
showed good performance even though it used only low-level
syntactic knowledge.

5. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

To experimentally evaluate the proposed model, we used two
types of test collections: One was the well-known automatic
content extraction (ACE) corpus [5], and the other was a Korean
news corpus that contains 1,540 sentences. The Korean news
corpus consists of two groups: One is 770 sentences describing
social relations between two people, and the other is 770
sentences containing two people’s names, but with no social
relations describing them. The first was manually annotated with
the category names in Table 1. We implemented a social relation
extraction system by replacing the default kernel of LibSVM [4]
with the proposed dependency trigram kernel. For experiments
with the ACE corpus and the Korean news corpus, we used a
Stanford dependency parser, a Korean POS tagger (precision =
95%) based on a hidden Markov model, and a Korean
dependency parser (precision = 85%).
Table 3 shows the performance of the proposed model
compared with the previous relation extraction systems in the
ACE corpus.

This research was supported by Basic Science Research Program
through the National Research Foundation of Korea(NRF) funded
by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology(No.20100009875) This work was also supported in part by the Center for
Intelligent Information Retrieval. Any opinions, findings and
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the
sponsor.

6. REFERENCES
[1] Agichtein, E. and Gravano, L. 2000. Snowball: Extracting
relations from large plain-text collections. In Proceedings of
ICDL.
[2] Bach, N. and Badaskar, S. 2007. A review of relation
extraction. Literature Review for Language and Statistics II,
Carnegie Mellon University.
[3] Bunescu, R. C. and Mooney, R. J. 2005. A shortest path
dependency kernel for relation extraction. In Proceedings of
HLT / EMNLP, 724–731.

Table 3. Comparison of performance in the ACE corpus
Recall
0.438
0.513
0.554

F1-measure
0.394
0.623

4. CONCLUSION

3. EVALUATION

Precision
0.655
0.686
0.702

Recall
0.267
0.602

In Table 4, the Bunescu system uses the same input features with
the proposed model. As shown in Table 4, the Bunescu system
showed a low recall rate when it does not use high-level semantic
knowledge such as named entity categories and semantic codes.

In Equation (4), Eq is the entropy of the q-th attribute, i.e., the
total information quantity for all attribute values included in the
q-th attribute. Further, MaxE and MinE are normalizing factors
denoting the maximum and the minimum of all the entropies of
attributes.

Model
Bunescu
Wang
Proposed model

Precision
0.746
0.646

F1-measure
0.525
0.587
0.626

[4] Chang, C. and Lin, C. 2001. LIBSVM: a library for support
vector machines. http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/~cjlin/libsvm.
[5] NIST 2007. The NIST ACE evaluation website.
http://www.nist.gov/speech/tests/ace

In Table 3, Bunescu indicates a relation extraction system using
the shortest path kernel [3]. Wang indicates a relation extraction
system based on a convolution dependency path kernel, which is
known as well relaxing the same length constraints of the shortest

[6] Wang, M. 2008. A re-examination of dependency path
kernels for relation extraction. In Proceedings of IJCNLP,
841-846.

1048

