Creating Temporally Dynamic Web Search Snippets
Krysta M. Svore, Jaime Teevan, Susan T. Dumais

Anagha Kulkarni

Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA, USA

Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA

{ksvore, teevan, sdumais}@microsoft.com

anaghak@cs.cmu.edu
content rather than explicit mentions of time, and we present a
more extensive user study with comparisons to a baseline nontemporal snippet.
Researchers have examined how changes in query frequency,
document content and user interaction with documents vary over
time. Kulkarni et al. [5] developed features to describe changes in
query popularity and showed that these features, accompanied by
changes in result content, can be a good indicator of a change in
query intent. Diaz [4] developed algorithms for identifying
queries that are related to breaking news and for blending relevant
news results into core search results. We use changes in page
content as an indication of the temporal relevance of a sentence
when selecting sentences to include in a snippet. We examine how
web content dynamics can be used to help users make more
informed decisions about the relevance of results.

ABSTRACT
Content on the Internet is always changing. We explore the value
of biasing search result snippets towards new webpage content.
We present results from a user study comparing traditional queryfocused snippets with snippets that emphasize new page content
for two query types: general and trending. Our results indicate that
searchers prefer the inclusion of temporal information for trending
queries but not for general queries, and that this is particularly
valuable for pages that have not been recently crawled.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information search
and retrieval – query formulation, search process.

Keywords
Web search, query dynamics, search result snippets.

2. GENERATING TEMPORAL SNIPPETS

1. INTRODUCTION

The snippets we study are query-focused for a given URL and
query. We consider two snippet lengths: long (4 sentences) and
short (2 sentences), and two variations of temporal snippets: one
that blends new content with the static baseline snippet, and one
that only contains new content. To create the snippets for a queryURL pair, we crawl the current version of the page (N for new),
and the version of the page that the search engine crawled (C for
cached). For each sentence on the webpage we determine its
position in the document and the number of total and unique
query terms it contains. The short baseline snippet is formed by
choosing the two earliest sentences from page N that contain the
most number of unique query terms. For the long baseline snippet,
we choose the four earliest sentences with the most number of
unique query terms. We do not use the search engine snippets as
the baseline since they are of variable length and may be
personalized.
For the temporal and blend snippets, we identify the sentences
that are the most changed from the cached page C. For each
sentence on page N, we determine its Dice coefficient with every
sentence on page C. The Dice score of the most similar cached
sentence is assigned to each sentence on page N, and sentences are
ranked by their Dice scores. Ties are broken by the number of

Web content change often drives people to visit webpages to see
what is new. For example, people visit news sites, blogs, and
social media sites to stay up-to-date. We believe the search
experience can be improved if people can quickly understand how
a page has changed. Search result snippets typically provide a
query-biased summary of the results. For example, Figure 1(a)
shows a snippet for the query tom bosley that provides
background information about the actor. However, people often
use search engines to find results that have changed [1]. Someone
who searched for tom bosley shortly after he died probably
already knew who he was and instead wanted to learn more about
his death. In cases like this, the availability of time-sensitive
information in the snippet (e.g., Figure 1(b)) may help the user
make better relevance decisions.
We explore the effectiveness of including new webpage content in
search result snippets. We develop a technique for identifying
important new content on a webpage, and generate several types
of snippets that take advantage of this information. We conducted
a study in which people judged these temporal snippets versus
baseline snippets for 465 unique query-URL pairs for two types of
queries: general and trending. The results demonstrate that for
trending queries searchers prefer temporal content over static
content. By leveraging temporal webpage information in snippets,
we can better indicate the relevance of the page to the query and
enhance the searcher’s experience.
Researchers have recently studied temporal features of snippets.
Alonso et al. [2] identified temporal expressions in webpages, and
developed snippet generation algorithms that included explicit
temporal expressions in sentence selection. Subjective evaluations
of the usefulness of temporal expressions were obtained for 10
queries. Campos et al. [3] examined the extent to which queries
and search snippets contained explicit temporal expressions. They
found that snippets were a rich source of temporal information
and could be used to identify whether queries had a temporal
intent. Our research differs in that we focus on changes in page

Tom Bosley: Biography from Answers.com
Tom Bosley won a Tony Award in 1958 for his lead role as New
York mayor Fiorello LaGuardia in the Broadway musical
Fiorello!. But Tom Bosley is better remembered for his role on
the long-running TV show Happy Days (1974-1984).
www.answers.com/topic/tom-bosley
(a) Baseline Snippet

Tom Bosley: Biography from Answers.com
Bosley died at 4:00 a.m. of heart failure on October 19, 2010, at
a hospital near his home in Palm Springs, California. His agent,
Sheryl Abrams, said Bosley had been battling lung cancer.
www.answers.com/topic/tom-bosley
(b) Temporal Snippet

Figure 1: Snippets for the same URL for the query tom bosley.
One (a) is query focused; the other (b) includes new content.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

1045

Table 1. Snippet preference for general and trending queries.
(Maximum value for Temporal v. Baseline is shaded.)

Table 2. Trending query snippet preference based on age of the
cached page. (Max. value for Temporal v. Baseline is shaded.)

Snippet Comparison
General or Trending Queries
Snippet Temporal
General Queries
Trending Queries
Length Content
Temp. Base. None Temp. Base. None
Short
New Only
17% 23% 60%
18% 20% 62%
Short
Blend
17% 18% 65% 23% 16% 61%
Long
Blend
11% 14% 75% 12% 12% 76%

Snippet Comparison
Fresh or Old Cached Page
Fresh Cache
Old Cache
Snippet Temporal
Length
Content
Temp. Base. None Temp. Base. None
Short
New Only 14% 21% 65% 20% 19%
61%
Short
Blend
19% 22% 59% 24% 13%
63%
Long
Blend
10% 14% 76% 13% 10%
77%

unique query terms, followed by the sentence position. Short
temporal (“new only”) snippets are formed from the two topranked temporal sentences. The short blend snippet consists of the
top-ranked baseline sentence and the top-ranked temporal
sentence. The long blend snippet is formed from the two topranked baseline sentences and the two top-ranked temporal
sentences. For all snippets, the selected sentences are shown in
order of their original positions on page N. Figure 1 shows the
short baseline and temporal snippets for a result for the query tom
bosely. We do not include long temporal snippets since many
pages did not contain 4 temporal sentences.

perhaps since they enable more background content to be shown.
In contrast to the general queries case, for the trending queries,
participants preferred snippets with temporal content to the
baseline snippets, despite the fact that our judges did not
necessarily know that the query had a temporal component. As
long as some background context was preserved in the temporal
snippets (i.e., the two blended temporal conditions), there was a
preference for the temporal snippet. Participants also had fewer
preferences in the case of longer snippets. But for the case of the
shorter snippets, participants preferred the temporal blended
snippet 59% of the time there was a preference.
These results suggest that for trending queries, displaying new
content in the snippet can be quite valuable. On manual
inspection, we noted that several of the baseline snippets for the
trending queries also contained very timely content. In all of these
cases, the search engine had recently crawled the page, so the
cached version contained very fresh content. To better understand
the impact of the time between cache and crawl, we further broke
down the data for our trending queries based on the age of the
cached page. For 58 of the 173 trending queries, the cached page
had been crawled very recently, within one day or less (called
fresh). For the other 115 queries, the cached webpage was over
one day old (called old). As can be seen in Table 2, when the
cached page was fresh and thus likely similar to the live page, the
baseline snippet was preferred over the temporal snippet
generated using the difference between the two pages. In contrast,
when the cached page was older people were much more likely to
prefer the temporal snippet, especially for short blended snippets.

3. STUDYING TEMPORAL SNIPPETS
Sixty-six people, responding to an email request sent to Microsoft
employees, participated in a remote study comparing the different
search result snippets. Participants were shown a query and asked
to indicate a preference for one of two snippets (a baseline snippet
and a temporal snippet) for the same URL. We studied three cases
for each query-URL pair: 1) Short baseline vs. Short temporal; 2)
Short baseline vs. Short blend; 3) Long baseline vs. Long blend.
Participants judged all three snippet combinations for 5 distinct
URLs for each query; however, combinations with no differences
between temporal and baseline snippets were not judged.
Placement of each snippet type was randomized to appear on the
top or bottom.
Queries were drawn from two sources: 1) a frequency-weighted
sample of general Bing search engine queries (292 query-URL
pairs), and 2) a sample of trending Bing queries that had a spike in
frequency the prior day (173 query-URL pairs). One challenge in
evaluating the temporal nature of a query is that relevance
judgments must occur at the time changes happen. Another
challenge is that participants not interested in the query topic may
not have the background knowledge to understand what is new or
interesting about the query. For this reason, judgments collected
in an experimental setting are likely to be biased toward
background information versus timely information, as compared
with real-world situations. To mitigate this, study participants
judged snippets the day after events happened (for trending
queries) and selected queries to judge from a list of candidate
queries, enabling them to select queries that they knew about.
Table 1 shows the snippet preferences for the general and trending
queries. For the general queries, baseline snippets were preferred
to temporal snippets, between 4% and 32% more often, depending
on the condition. This preference is expected since sentences in
the baseline snippet are chosen based on the presence of the query
terms, and thus are consistently more query-focused than the
temporal snippets. For example, in Figure 1, the full query tom
bosely appears twice in the baseline snippet, while only bosely
appears in the temporal snippet. Previous work [6] suggests users
prefer snippets with many query terms. The baseline snippets may
also perform well since they typically provide good background
context for the result. This is evidenced by the fact that
preferences are less pronounced when there is additional context
provided in the blended temporal snippet. Likewise, long snippets
result in fewer preferences (75% of the pairs have no preference),

4. CONCLUSION
We performed a user study to determine the impact of including
new content in search result snippets for general and trending
queries. Our results indicate that users find new content useful for
trending queries and when the cached page content is older. A
snippet blending static and temporal information also appears
beneficial, particularly for trending queries. In future work we
hope to study re-finding behavior, which accounts for a significant
portion of web search activity. Temporal snippets may be
particularly valuable when the user has seen the snippet before.

5. REFERENCES
[1] Adar, E., Teevan, J. & Dumais, S. T. Resonance on the web:
Web dynamics and revisitation patterns. CHI 2009, 1381-1390.

[2] Alonso, O., Baeza-Yates, R. & Gertz, M. Effectiveness of
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]

1046

temporal snippets. WWW 2009: Workshop on Web Search
Results Summarization and Presentation.
Campos, R., Dias, G. & Jorge, A.M. What is the temporal value
of web snippets? WWW 2011: Temporal Web Analytics
Workshop.
Diaz, F. Integration of news content into web results. WSDM
2009, 182-191.
Kulkarni, A., Teevan, J., Svore, K. M. & Dumais, S. T.
Understanding temporal query dynamics. WSDM 2011, 167-176.
Tombros, A. & Sanderson, M. Advantages of query-biased
summaries in information retrieval. SIGIR 1998, 2-1.

