Collaborative Filtering with Short Term Preferences Mining
Diyi Yang

Tianqi Chen

Weinan Zhang

Yong Yu

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai, China

{yangdiyi, tqchen, wnzhang,yyu}@apex.sjtu.edu.cn

ABSTRACT
Recently, recommender systems have fascinated researchers
and beneﬁted a variety of people’s online activities, enabling
users to survive the explosive web information. Traditional
collaborative ﬁltering techniques handle the general recommendation well. However, most such approaches usually focus on long term preferences. To discover more short term
factors inﬂuencing people’s decisions, we propose a short term preferences model, implemented with implicit user feedback. We conduct experiments comparing the performances
of diﬀerent short term models, which show that our model
outperforms signiﬁcantly compared to those long term models.

term preferences are volatile. They may depend more on the
current situation, users’ mood at present, or his/her recent
actions. For example, John might suddenly change from his
favorite Jazz to light songs just because he had an unexpected guest who required it. It is hard to capture, but better performances will be achieved if considered. We extract
this preference, and integrate it with the classical SVD++
model. Experiments conducted on Yahoo! Music dataset
show that our model achieves better performances than the
baseline SVD++, which proves that short term information
does help capture users’ changing preferences. We present
our models in Section 2, and experimental results in Section
3. In Section 4, we conclude our work.

Categories and Subject Descriptors

2. SHORT TERM MODELS

H.3.3 [Information Systems]: Information Search and Retrieval—Information Filtering

We introduce our models for short term preferences mining in this section, and characterize short term property
through users’ implicit feedback. Implicit feedback, i.e. the
users’ rating history, as an indicator of user preferences,
refers to all kinds of behaviors that users have performed
on items. The traditional matrix factorization model with
implicit feedback, called SVD++, predicts user u’s rating
rui on item i as follows[2]:
T


j∈N (u) yj
rui = bu + bi + pu + 
qi
(1)
|N (u)|

General Terms
Algorithms, Models, Experiments

Keywords
Collaborative Filtering, User Feedback, Recommender Systems

1. INTRODUCTION

Here, N (u) is the item set of implicit feedback of user u.
bu is the users’ bias and items’ bias denotes as bi . Each
user u is related to pu , and each item i are associated with
vectors qi , yj (pu , qi , yj ∈ Rk ).

Collaborative ﬁltering (CF) has been widely used in web
services, such as products recommendation at Amazon1 and
music recommendation at Pandora2 . There are two canonical approaches to attack this problem. Latent factor models, like singular value decomposition (SVD), map users and
items into the same low-dimensional space and predict users’ interest on items based on the relations between mapped
vectors. The second are neighborhood models, which concentrate on detecting the correlations or similarities between
items/users. Both approaches focus on users’ long term interests, and do recommendation based on those stable preferences.
However, people’s interests are likely to change over time.
Long term interests, stay stable for a long time, but short
1
2

2.1

Incorporate Short Term Implicit Feedback

Even though global implicit feedback performs eﬀectively,
it only captures users’ long term preferences by using the
users’ whole rating history. Since users’ interests vary with
time, we also need to take the short term, especially the
current interest, into consideration. Therefore, we propose
a novel short term model as follows:
T



j∈N (u) yj
j∈N (u,t) ξj
rui (t) = bu + bi + pu + 
qi
+ 
|N (u)|
|N (u, t)|
(2)
Here N (u, t) is user u’s short term implicit feedback during
time interval t. t is a time indicator that could be week,
day, hour, or even minute. ξj (∈ Rk ) is an item revelent vector. By limiting the original global implicit feedback to a
short time t like a minute/an hour, it can capture those fac-

http://www.amazon.com/
http://www.pandora.com

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

1043

RMSE on different data categories

Average RMSE
23.233
22.673
22.814
22.922
22.972

28

GSVDP
Clock.GSVDP

26
Average RMSE

Models
GSVDP
Clock.GSVDP
Hour.GSVDP
Day.GSVDP
Week.GSVDP

Table 1: RMSE of diﬀerent short term implicit feedback models

24
22
20
18
16
Artist

tors that inﬂuences people’s decisions directly. For example,
an Elsevier3 user may start to download some CF relevant
papers because of confusion in recommendation techniques
that a biological paper he is reading refers to. This model
captures users’ short term interests through their behaviors
during a certain period, and does not require extra parameters when we need t to be ﬁner granularity, diﬀering from
the traditional temporal dynamics model[3].

3.

Genre

Track

Figure 1: Performance Comparison on Diﬀerent
Categories
SVDP outperforms Day.GSVDP with day model superior to
Week.GSVDP, we consider that relative large time granularity cannot preserve the short term property, i.e. latest users’
activities aﬀects their future’s decisions powerfully. Week
model performs the nearly same RMSE as day model, that
is, when reaching certain time granularity, models forfeit the
ability of precisely capturing such preferences. Thus, clock
short term implicit feedback is more predictive than hour,
day and week granularity, consisting with our experimental
results. Implemented with GSVDP which captures the users’ long term preferences, our short term models have both
long term and short term capabilities to fully capture users’
interest.
To investigate whether the short term model produces the
consistency of improvement or not, we present each category’s RMSE changes between GSVDP and Clock.GSVDP in
Figure 1. There are four categories, artist, album, genre and
track, in Yahoo! Music dataset. As we can see, short term
implicit feedback models give decreased RMSE on all categories. This consistency of improvement emphasizes again
that mining short term information will do well in enhancing
a model’s overall performance.

EXPERIMENT

3.1 Experiment Setup
We use the Yahoo! Music Track 1 dataset[1] introduced
in the KDDCup 2011. It contains about 250 million ratings rated by 1 million users for about 0.6 million items
with time stamps. We use the oﬃcial training and validation dataset for training, and report RMSE (Rooted Mean
Square Error) on test dataset. To investigate the eﬀectiveness of short term implicit feedback, we utilize ﬁve kinds of
information, whose implicit feedback comes from the whole
history, current week, current day, current hour and current
minute(the least time granularity in dataset). We call the
model which uses all of the users’ rating history as GSVDP.
The others are Week.GSVDP, Day.GSVDP, Hour.GSVDP
and Clock.GSVDP. Moreover, since we want to test whether
the short term preferences help enhance GSVDP, those four
models are all implemented with GSVDP as Equation 2. As
well as comparing overall performance of the ﬁve versions, we also discuss the resolution at which time granularity contributes most. Finally, to further analyze the consistency of short term preferences, we conduct experiments
and present each category’s diﬀerences between GSVDP and
Clock.GSVDP.

4. CONCLUSION
In this work, we extract the short term preferences to
enhance our model, and implemented experiments are conducted in diﬀerent short term settings. We conclude that
short term performs well in capturing users’ perdue interests and predicts changing preferences more precisely. In
the future, we are determined to explore short term preferences further and improve our model systematically.

3.2 Experiment Results
The results of our experiments are presented in Table 1.
We ﬁnd that short term implicit feedback models outperform basic GSVDP signiﬁcantly. From GSVDP’s 23.233
to each short term models’ 22.x, diﬀerent degree of improvements have been given. For example, Clock.GSVDP
gives 22.673, achieving the greatest improvement among all
the short term models. The runner up result is given by
Hour.GSVDP(22.814). Week.GSVDP produces 22.972, and
Day.GSVDP is a little better than week model with a RMSE
of 22.922. Therefore, it is reachable that short term implicit
feedback models assure big improvement overall in contrast
to GSVDP.
It is naturally discovered that as time granularity increases, short term models give less satisfying performances. Since Clock.GSVDP is superior to Hour.GSVDP, and Hour.G3

Album

5. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Yong Yu is supported by grants from NSFC-RGC joint
research project 60931160445.

6.

REFERENCES

[1] G. Dror, N. Koenigstein, Y. Koren, and M. Weimer. The
yahoo! music dataset and kdd-cup’11. In KDD-Cup
Workshop 2011, 2011.
[2] Y. Koren. Factorization meets the neighborhood: a
multifaceted collaborative filtering model. In Proceeding of
the 14th ACM SIGKDD international conference on
Knowledge discovery and data mining, KDD ’08, 2008.
[3] Y. Koren. Collaborative filtering with temporal dynamics. In
Proceedings of the 15th ACM SIGKDD international
conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, KDD
’09, 2009.

www.elsevier.com

1044

