Emotion Tagging for Comments of Online News by Meta
Classification with Heterogeneous Information Sources∗
Ying Zhang

Yi Fang

Xiaojun Quan

Dept. of Computer Science
Nankai University
zhangying@dbis.nankai.edu.cn

Dept. of Computer Science
Purdue University
yfang.purdue@gmail.com

Dept. of Computer Science
City University of Hong Kong
xiaoquan@student.cityu.edu.hk

Lin Dai

Luo Si

Xiaojie Yuan

Dept. of Computer Science
Beijing Institute of Technology
dailiu@bit.edu.cn

Dept. of Computer Science
Purdue University
lsi@cs.purdue.edu

Dept. of Computer Science
Nankai University
yuanxj@nankai.edu.cn

ABSTRACT
With the rapid growth of online news services, users can actively respond to online news by making comments. Users
often express subjective emotions in comments such as sadness, surprise and anger. Such emotions can help understand
the preferences and perspectives of individual users, and
therefore may facilitate online publishers to provide users
with more relevant services. This paper tackles the task of
predicting emotions for the comments of online news. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst research work for
addressing the task. In particular, this paper proposes a novel Meta classiﬁcation approach that exploits heterogeneous
information sources such as the content of the comments
and the emotion tags of news articles generated by users.
The experiments on two datasets from online news services
demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of the proposed approach.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.3.3 [Information
Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search and Retrieval
General Terms: Algorithms, Experimentation
Keywords: Emotion Tagging, Meta Classiﬁcation, Online
News

sites provide a novel service via which users can share their
emotions after reading news articles by selecting emotion
tags. Figure 1 shows an example from a popular Chinese
news website (i.e., Sina News1 ). The user-generated emotion tags for news articles can naturally provide guidance
for assigning emotion tags to individual comments.
This paper focuses on the research problem of emotion
tagging for comments of online news. As far as we know, this
is the ﬁrst research work for addressing the problem. Some
prior work tries to predict emotions of online news articles [2,
4]. Most of these techniques for news articles mainly analyze
the content information [1, 3]. This paper proposes novel
research to exploit heterogeneous information sources with a
Meta classiﬁcation approach by utilizing both the content of
comments and available user-generated emotion tags of news
articles. In particular, a content-based classiﬁer is built with
a text categorization approach, which is combined with the
information of emotion tags of news articles within a Meta
classiﬁer by a probabilistic combination method.

1. INTRODUCTION
The emergence of social media is reshaping the way how
people consume news. Online readers can actively respond
to online news by making comments. Users often express
subjective emotions in the comments such as sadness, surprise and anger. Such emotions can help understand the
preferences and perspectives of individual users, and therefore may facilitate online publishers to provide users with
more personalized services. It is a challenging and practical research problem to automatically assign emotion tags
to users’ comments of online news. One natural approach
to achieving the goal is to classify users’ comments into different emotion tags based on the contents of the comments.
On the other side, an increasing number of social news web-

Figure 1: An example of emotion tags voted by 244
users for a Sina news article. The emotion labels (from left to right) are: touched, sympathetic,
bored, angry, amused, sad, surprised and fervent.

2. METHODS
In this paper, we adopt two heterogeneous information
sources of users’ comments of online news. The ﬁrst one is
based on a text categorization approach with contents of the
comments, namely Content-based Model (CM). Formally,
the probability that the ith comment will be tagged as a
predeﬁned emotion ek ∈ E(k = 1, 2, ..., NE ) by this method,
referred as cik , can be expressed as follows in terms of softmax function over a linear function of features,
exp(ωkT φi )
cik = P (ek |φi ) = N
(1)
E
T
r=1 exp(ωr φi )

∗This research is partially supported by NSF of China research grants 61170184, and also partially supported by NSF
research grants IIS-0746830, CNS-1012208 and IIS-1017837.
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

1

1059

http://news.sina.com.cn/society/

Here the feature vector φi is composed by the count of each
term in the ith comment. ωk denotes the combination parameters for each term with emotion ek , and can be estimated by maximizing log-likelihood function with L2 (i.e.,
 E
ridge) regularization. It is worth noting that N
k=1 cik = 1.
The second one is derived from the emotion tags of news
articles generated by users, namely User Emotion Tags Model (UM). We can follow the ratio of votes of each emotion to
all emotions for tagging emotion for comments. Let uik denote how likely the ith comment will be tagged by emotion
ek according to the information of emotion tags.
To better integrate the two heterogeneous information
sources, a Meta classiﬁer approach is utilized for emotion
tagging of users’ comments, called Meta Classiﬁcation Model (MCM). We use the outputs of the above models as features, and also add a constant feature as the bias. Therefore,
the probability that emotion ek will be assigned to the ith
comment can be estimated as below,
 E
NE
exp(αk + N
l=1 βlk cil +
l=1 γlk uil )
P (ek |ci , ui ) = N
NE
NE
E
exp(α
+
β
c
+
r
lr
il
l=1
l=1 γlr uil )
r=1

content of comments is more eﬀective and reliable than users’ emotion tags of news articles, as a single data source to
tag emotions for comments. 2) MCM consistently outperforms CM and UM in terms of all evaluation measures. A
paired t-test shows that all improvements of MCM over CM
are statistically signiﬁcant with p-value < 0.001. This indicates that it is more eﬀective that exploiting heterogeneous
information sources with a Meta classiﬁcation approach by
utilizing both the content of comments and users’ emotion
tags of news articles than the methods using either single
source, as each source provides its own insight on tagging
emotions for the comments of online news.

Figure 2: The distributions of labeled comments on
8 predefined emotions in each dataset.

where α, β and γ denote the combination parameters for
bias, the source of comments content and the source of emotion tags of news articles respectively. These parameters
can be determined by maximizing the log-likelihood function
(i.e., Quasi-Newton optimization method in this paper).

3.

Table 1: MRR and accuracy@1,2,3 of each dataset.
UM
CM
MCM

EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION

We collected most-viewed news articles and their some
most popular comments and emotion tags, in one month
of 2011 from the society channel of Sina News and the entertainment channel of QQ News2 . Both Sina and QQ are
among the largest news portals in China. We use these Chinese datasets since we have not found similar services in English yet, but the proposed model is language independent.
We then sample 200 news articles from each news service
to construct our two datasets. All news articles and users’
comments are segmented to terms by a Chinese word segmentation software: ICTCLAS3 . The two datasets contain
8,794 distinct terms in 3,593 comments and 9,401 distinct
terms in 3,623 comments respectively. For each dataset, one
person was asked to label an emotion tag for each comment from 8 predeﬁned emotion categories which are the same
as the emotion tags in news services. The distributions of
labeled comments on the 8 emotions are shown in Figure 2.
We compare the performances of emotion tagging using
CM, UM and MCM with 10-fold cross validation on two
dataset. Two measures are adopted: mean reciprocal rank
(MRR) and accuracy (A@n). Given a comment c, its labeled
emotion ec and predicted emotion set Enc including n topranked emotions, Ac @n is deﬁned as,

1, ec ∈ Enc
Ac @n =
(2)
0, ec ∈
/ Enc

Thus, A@n for the collection C is: A@n = c∈C Ac @n/|C|.
Table 1 shows MRR and A@n(n = 1, 2, 3) in each dataset.
A@n(n = 1, 2, ..., 8) is shown in Figure 3. Based on these
results, we can make the following observations: 1) CM performs much better than UM. This seems to indicate that
2
3

MRR
0.54
0.65
0.69

Sina
A@1
0.35
0.47
0.53

set
A@2
0.50
0.66
0.70

A@3
0.62
0.78
0.82

MRR
0.52
0.65
0.67

QQ set
A@1 A@2
0.32
0.46
0.49
0.65
0.50
0.67

A@3
0.61
0.76
0.79

Figure 3: Accuracy at all positions of each dataset.

4. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper focuses on emotion tagging for users’ comments of online news by considering heterogeneous information sources. The empirical results on two testbeds have
shown the eﬀectiveness of the proposed approach. This work
is an initial step towards a promising research direction. The
learned feature weights in Meta classiﬁcation model are ﬁxed
for all comments. In the future work, we will propose more
sophisticated probabilistic models by enabling the feature
weights to be adaptive to speciﬁc users or comments. We
will also explore to incorporate other information sources.

5.

REFERENCES

[1] C. Alm, D. Roth, and R. Sproat. Emotions from text: machine
learning for text-based emotion prediction. In EMNLP, pages
579–586, 2005.
[2] S. Bao, S. Xu, L. Zhang, R. Yan, Z. Su, D. Han, and Y. Yu.
Mining social emotions from aﬀective text. IEEE TKDE, 2011.
[3] D. Das and S. Bandyopadhyay. Sentence to document level
emotion tagging–a coarse-grained study on bengali blogs.
Advances in Pattern Recognition, 2010.
[4] K. Lin, C. Yang, and H. Chen. What emotions do news articles
trigger in their readers? In SIGIR, pages 733–734, 2007.

http://ent.qq.com/.
http://www.ictclas.org.

1060

