How Query Extensions Reflect Search Result
Abandonments
Aleksandr Chuklin

Pavel Serdyukov

Yandex & Moscow Institute of Physics and
Technology
Moscow, Russia

Yandex
Moscow, Russia

pavser@yandex-team.ru

chuklin@yandex-team.ru

ABSTRACT

2. METHOD

It is often considered that high abandonment rate corresponds to poor IR system performance. However several
studies suggested that there are so called good abandonments, i.e. situations when search engine result page contains
enough details to satisfy the user information need without
necessity to click on search results. In this work we propose
to look at query extensions. We will show that an extension
by itself might motivate abandonment type (good or bad )
for the underlying query to some degree. We also propose a
way to ﬁnd potentially good abandonment extensions in an
automated manner.

We started with the query log of a large commercial search
engine. We extracted queries that were issued at least 10
times in 10-days period and calculated abandonment rate.
We say that the query q was abandoned if it was not followed
by any click on a search result item’s url/image. If we had
some clickable ads or Answers1 present we counted these
clicks as usual. If the query was followed by another search
request and user did not return to the query q we still mark
q as abandoned.
After that we performed automated extraction of query
extensions. If query q  matched pattern ”s q” or ”q s” for
some query q and some suﬃx/preﬁx s (s consists of one
or more words) and queries q and q  were both present in
our dataset D, we said that q  is an extended query for q:
q  = e(q), where function e is parametrized by either suﬃx
or preﬁx. Then we compared abandonment rates a for the
query q and its extended variant q  . For each extension e we
calculated the following value:



a(e(q)) 
q
∈
D
&
e(q)
∈
D
(1)
γ(e) = M edian
a(q) 

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information
Search and Retrieval

General Terms
Experimentation, Veriﬁcation, Human Factors

Keywords

If the value is greater than 1 we may claim that this particular extension e increases abandonment rate, being applied
to the query. We have an intuition that some query extensions may correspond to very speciﬁc information needs
that can easily be answered directly on a search engine result page. The top and the bottom γ values are presented
in Table 1.
We performed hand labeling of 190 popular query extensions found in our dataset2 . The question was similar to that used in [4] to ﬁnd potential good abandonment
queries: ”Given an extension e is it true that queries with
such an extension have a dominant information need that
could theoretically be achieved by an internet search engine
result page?”. As in [4] possible answers were ”yes”, ”no”
or ”maybe”. In order to conﬁrm correlation of γ value and
potential good abandonment label we sorted all extensions
according to γ (in descending order) and split them to 10
bins of equal size. Label distribution in each bin is visualized in the Figure 1. We can see that the portion of potential
good abandonments decreases with decrease of γ while the
portion of potential bad abandonments increases. Some deviations from this trend may be motivated by poor search

query log analysis, query reformulation, search result abandonments

1.

INTRODUCTION

Abandonment rate is one of the most broadly used online
user satisfaction metrics to evaluate the quality of information retrieval (IR) system. It is often considered that high
abandonment rate corresponds to poor IR system performance. However in [4] it was suggested that some abandonments might be good : user decided not to click on search
results because her information need were satisﬁed with a
search engine result page (SERP) itself. Such situations
were further studied in [3] where cursor movements were
proposed to measure user satisfaction when no clicks had
been issued. In all previous works authors relied on human
judgements to decide whether particular query resulted in a
good abandonment or not without evaluating actual user behavior. Work [1] even suggested that users tend to go to the
original document (click on the page/URL) even if the snippet shows the information they were needed. So, we wanted
to ﬁnd real-world evidence for these good abandonments.

1
As in [2] we use the notion of Answers: specially designed
search result items.
2
Queries with such extensions represent 4% of all search
engine traﬃc.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

1087

Figure 1: γ and Potential Good Abandonments

Table 1: Query Extensions (translated)
extension
γ
Finnish (translate)
2.584
Polish (translate)
2.150
author (who is the author of . . . ?)
2.014
English (translate)
1.758
qt (programming)
1.727
Schengen
1.705
post code
1.649
Tatar (translate)
1.519
capital (what is the capital of . . . ?)
1.410
credit (credit program)
1.363
...
...
visual basic (programming)
0.551
dating
0.550
auto
0.540
map
0.520
oﬃcial site (of some company/person) 0.508
Kazakh (translate)
0.504
c# (programming)
0.494
points of interest
0.387
ipod (soft)
0.304
top 40
0.293

If we used unit weight vector, we got correlation equal to
0.507. When we set wi equal to the number of diﬀerent
queries used with the extension ei we got correlation equal
to 0.518.

3. DISCUSSION
result quality, unusual user behavior or the expert’s uncertainty.
It is important to note that we did not perform labeling
of the SERPs (we labeled extensions only). As it was shown
in [1] user behavior on good-looking SERPs may not necessarily result in abandonment: 68% of participants said that
they still click on the page/URL even if the snippet shows
the information they were looking for. So we decided to have
clean assessors instructions in order to avoid problems with
rating process.
We also experimented with a somewhat diﬀerent task. We
provided assessors not only with extension itself but also
with a small sample of extended queries3 with this extension. That diﬀerent task resulted in almost identical labeling and we decided not to include the results to this work.
It was interesting ﬁnding that information contained in an
extension itself is generally suﬃcient to determine potential
abandonment type.
CORRELATION. In order to compute numerical representation of the results shown in the Figure 1 we calculated
correlation value of potential abandonment type and γ. For
each extension ei we computed xi = γi − 1 and
⎧
⎪
⎨1 if ei was marked as potentially good
yi = 0 if ei was marked as maybe
⎪
⎩−1 if e was marked as potentially bad
i

In this paper we performed analysis of query extensions
and their eﬀects on query abandonments. We found that
some extensions usually result in higher abandonment rate
while others decrease abandonment rate dramatically. By
performing hand labeling we found that median abandonment ratio is correlated with potential abandonment type
of the extension: potentially bad extensions decrease abandonment rate while potentially good extensions increase it.
These results may be exploited by search engines to improve Answers quality4 . Now rules to ﬁre an Answer are
usually selected by humans and do not necessarily reﬂect
actual user needs. In this work we showed that queries with
several extensions (with high γ value) are very likely to be
good abandonments and therefore are good candidates to
be presented with Answers. For this task we need to ﬁlter
out queries with Answer already present and sort the extensions according to the γ value. We did not show the results
here, but they look very similar giving us weighted correlation with potential good abandonment equal to 0.588 and
unweighted correlation equal to 0.469.

4. REFERENCES
[1] O. Alonso, R. Baeza-Yates, and M. Gertz. Eﬀectiveness
of temporal snippets. In WWW’09.
[2] L. Chilton and J. Teevan. Addressing people’s
information needs directly in a web search result page.
In WWW’11.
[3] J. Huang, R. R. W. White, and S. Dumais. No clicks,
no problem: using cursor movements to understand and
improve search. In CHI’11.
[4] J. Li, S. Huﬀman, and A. Tokuda. Good abandonment
in mobile and PC internet search. In SIGIR’09.

Once we have two vectors x and y we can compute correlation coeﬃcient:
Corr(x, y) =
μx =

n
i=1 wi (xi −
n
2
w
i=1 i (xi − μx )
n
i=1 wi xi
, μy =
n
i=1 wi

μx )(yi − μy )
n
i=1

wi (yi
n
i=1 wi yi
n
i=1 wi

− μy )2

where w is a weight vector.
3

4

we used 10

1088

See [2] for a detailed analysis of Answers.

