Gender-aware Re-ranking
Eugene Kharitonov

Pavel Serdyukov

Yandex, LLC & Moscow Institute of Physics and
Technology
16, Leo Tolstoy st
Moscow, Russia

Yandex, LLC
16, Leo Tolstoy st
Moscow, Russia

pavser@yandex-team.ru

kharitonov@yandex-team.ru

ABSTRACT

ranking experiments with respect to queries of different level
of ambiguity.

In this paper we study usefulness of users’ gender information for improving ranking of ambiguous queries in personalized and non-contextual settings. This study is performed as
a sequence of offline re-ranking experiments and it demonstrates that the proposed gender-aware ranking features provide improvements in ranking quality. It is also shown that
the proposed personalized features exhibit performance superior to non-contextual ones.

2.

GENDER-AWARE RE-RANKING

Algorithms, Measurement

We organize our study as a comparison of non-contextual
and personalized gender-aware settings in terms of retrieval
quality improvements. The comparison is performed in a
set of re-ranking experiments performed in an offline setup,
following the evaluation scenario proposed in [1] and [2].
We build a dataset of user sessions and augment it with
proposed features. Secondly, we learn a function which predicts a document with a user-specific positive judgement in
each query session. Finally, documents are re-ranked according to their probability of being relevant. The re-ranking
quality is measured by the inverse of the rank of the relevant document (mean reciprocal rank, MRR). The original
ranking produced by the search engine serves as a baseline.

Keywords

2.1

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Information
Search and Retrieval

General Terms

web search, personalization, gender-aware ranking

1.

Dataset

Firstly, we build a set of search sessions (session is a sequence of actions separated with time intervals not longer
than 20 minutes) that took place during a four-week period
and were performed by users from a 44mln anonymized set
of users whose gender is known with a high degree of confidence1 . The sessions from the first two weeks were used to
calculate gender-aware query and document features. The
rest of the sessions were used to train and evaluate the reranking algorithm. From the latter subset we removed sessions associated with 15 most popular queries and all queries
which were asked less than 100 times by either female or
male users.
To proceed, let us introduce the necessary terminology. A
click is called satisfied if it is the last click in the session or
it has dwell time not less than 30 seconds [1, 2]. We refer to
a query result as examined in a session if it was clicked or
there is a click on the result below or a user clicked on the
”next page” button.
Since labelling relevance judgements to evaluate personalized search is impractical, we use a user’s click behaviour
instead. With each session we assign a positive judgement
to one of the top 10 urls if it corresponds to the last click

INTRODUCTION

Web search personalization and utilization of a search context in ranking received a lot of interest in the research
community. For instance, the geographical context was discussed in the paper by Bennett et al. [1], Collins-Thompson
et al. [2] proposed a method to provide users with results
personalized by their reading proficiency level. Both papers
demonstrated that the search context is especially useful in
case of ambiguous and underspecified queries. Several studies (e.g., [4, 5, 6]) suggested that enriching the search context
with the user’s gender data has potential to improve retrieval
quality. But, to the best of our knowledge, specific attempts
to quantitatively assess possible usefulness of gender data in
the large-scale web search setting were not yet made.
However, we consider the goal of this paper to be a little broader: we want to investigate how information about
user’s gender can be used to improve ranking quality of
”hard”, ambiguous queries not only in personalized, but in
non-contextual setting, too. The main contribution of the
paper is two-fold: 1) Introduction of two groups of genderaware features: non-contextual and personalized; 2) Comprehensive study of both groups of features in off-line re-

1

A user’s gender is determined by a proprietary classifier.
This classifier was trained to separate users of both genders
using their genders and full names (often gender-specific)
specified in their personal accounts at the search engine or
in their accounts at popular social networks outlinked from
the search engine account. The accuracy of the classifier on
the considered set of users is 80%.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

1081

in the session and this click was satisfied (the last click in a
session is not necessarily satisfied due to possible additional
queries without clicks). All other documents from the top-10
results are considered as irrelevant, even if they were not examined. Sessions without positive judgements were removed
from the dataset. Labelling non-examined documents as irrelevant provides us with the lower bound on the re-ranking
performance. As a result we have the dataset of 15,021,054
sessions with 30,329 unique queries. Due to the filtering performed while constructing the dataset, it constitutes 18% of
the whole query stream. The dataset was uniformly divided
into two approximately equal parts: training and test sets.
Learning to rank was performed by the Generalized Boosted
Regression Models R package [3], with its parameters tuned
on a subset of the training data. The number of iterations
was set to 3000, learning rate to 0.005, exponential (adaboost) loss function was selected.

2.2

are believed to correspond to more ambiguous queries (for
instance, in [1]). Symbols N and M denote improvements
statistically significant according to Wilcoxon paired signedrank test at the p < 0.01 and p < 0.05 levels, respectively.
The last column shows which part of the test set is covered
with queries of the specific ambiguity level. This ratio was
estimated using the first two-week part of the dataset.

Features
4.

Let us consider features used to rank document D for a
query Q asked by a user U of gender G. These features can
be divided into two groups:
G1: Non-contextual group of gender-aware features includes features which do not take the gender of the current user U into account: 1) Two features characterize symmetrised Kullback-Leibler Divergences between gender distributions of users who submit query Q and users a) who
click on the documents from the same site2 as D b) for
whom these clicks are satisfied. 2) Entropy of the gender
distribution of users who submit Q: H(G|Q); 3)Usefulness
of the G attribute to predict clicked documents in sessions
with query Q, calculated as information gain ratio:
"
#
X
1
H(U |Q) −
p(G) · H(U |Q, G)
IGR(G, Q) =
H(G|Q)
G

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

As we hoped, described features are especially useful for
ranking ”hard”, ambiguous and underspecified queries. Also,
we see that the relative usefulness of the gender context increases as query ambiguity grows. The performance demonstrated on high-entropy queries is comparable to reported in
other papers on personalization [1, 2]. It should be noticed
that personalized features exhibit superior improvements in
comparison with non-personalized ones on every subset of
queries.
However, there is a variety of reasons for query ambiguity
and, surely, only a part of ambiguous queries can be disambiguated be means of gender information.
As a natural direction of the future work we consider extending the search context to include more socio-demographic
user attributes (e.g., age). Furthermore, it is tempting to
learn user latent attributes automatically from their search
behaviour and add them to the search context afterwards.

where H(U |Q) - entropy of distribution of clicks over documents, H(U |Q, G) - click entropy calculated using only clicks
of users of gender G. Information gain ratio is widely used
as a feature selection criterion in decision tree algorithms.
G2: Personalized feature set include the following features: 1) probability that result D for query Q will be clicked
after examination by a user of gender G; 2) probability that
a user of gender G will be satisfied with the document D for
query Q after clicking on it;
The original (baseline) ranking algorithm uses features
similar to G2, but calculated on the whole population of
the users. The reciprocal of the document’s original rank
was included as an additional feature in all the experiments.

3.

Table 1: Re-ranking results for subsets of the test
data. Higher values of H(U |Q) correspond to higher
level of query ambiguity
G1, %
G2, %
G1+G2, % share
H(U |Q) ≥ 3 +0.8 M
+1.2 N
+1.9 N
5.5%
H(U |Q) ≥ 2 +0.2 M
+0.4 N
+0.6 N
33.3%
H(U |Q) ≥ 1
+0.03
+0.3 N
+0.3 N
66.1%
Entire set
+0.04 M +0.05 N
+0.1 N
100 %

5.

REFERENCES

[1] P. N. Bennett, F. Radlinski, R. W. White, and
E. Yilmaz. Inferring and using location metadata to
personalize web search. SIGIR, 2011.
[2] K. Collins-Thompson, P. N. Bennett, R. W. White,
S. de la Chica, and D. Sontag. Personalizing web search
results by reading level. CIKM, 2011.
[3] G. Ridgeway. Generalized boosted models: A guide to
the gbm package, 2007.
[4] J. Teevan, M. R. Morris, and S. Bush. Discovering and
using groups to improve personalized search. WSDM,
2009.
[5] I. Weber and C. Castillo. The demographics of web
search. SIGIR, 2010.
[6] I. Weber and A. Jaimes. Who uses web search for what:
and how. WSDM, 2011.

RESULTS

It should be emphasized that the baseline ranking is a
very competitive one since it represents a default ranking
of a commercial search engine. We do not report absolute
values of quality metrics due to proprietary nature of the
system, but report relative improvements over the baseline
instead (in accordance with previous studies, e.g. [1, 2]).
We use click entropy H(U |Q) to sample subsets of queries
with different levels of ambiguity: higher values of entropy
2

Aggregation at the document level did not result into any
improvement. The reasons could be: 1) gender-specific interest has site-level granularity 2) increased sparsity.

1082

