Making Results Fit Into 40 Characters:
A Study in Document Rewriting
Johannes Leveling and Gareth J. F. Jones
School of Computing, CNGL
Dublin City University
Dublin, Ireland

{jleveling, gjones}@computing.dcu.ie
ABSTRACT

are used; results are easier to understand when more consistent vocabulary is used; and there is less loss of meaning which can result
when a full document is summarized. In this paper, we investigate
document rewriting and its effect on document length and readability to adapt result presentation to mobile devices.

With the increasing popularity of mobile and hand-held devices,
automatic approaches for adapting results to the limited screen size
of mobile devices are becoming more important. Traditional approaches for reducing the length of textual results include summarization and snippet extraction. In this study, we investigate document rewriting techniques which retain the meaning and readability
of the original text. Evaluations on different document sets show
that i) rewriting documents considerably reduces document length
and thus, scrolling effort on devices with limited screen size, and
ii) the rewritten documents have a higher readability.

2. RELATED WORK

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.1 [INFORMATION STORAGE AND RETRIEVAL]: Content Analysis and Indexing—Abstracting Methods, Linguistic Processing

General Terms
Experimentation, Measurement

Keywords
Document rewriting, Summarization, Result presentation

1.

INTRODUCTION

With the increasing popularity of handheld devices, making effective use of the limited screen size becomes more important. Showing textual information retrieval (IR) results still predominates on
mobile devices with small screens. Documents are often laid out
for presentation on desktop displays. Access to these documents
from mobile devices can result in a poor or unusable experience,
because only a limited amount of material is visible to the user and
context and overview are lost due to the limited screen size.
We investigate document rewriting, which comprises adding, deleting, or modifying phrases, words, or characters in text to reduce
the number of lines needed to render the text while retaining its
meaning and readability. The objective of rewriting is to use the
display area on mobile devices more effectively, which can have
many benefits: elder people or visually impaired people can use
an increased font size for better readability; the decision if a document is actually relevant can be made more easily by showing more
or longer document snippets; the user effort in scrolling through results is reduced; the list of results can be read faster if shorter words
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

McKay and Watter [4] discuss four different approaches to migrate data to mobile devices: 1. direct migration (i.e. unmodified
content), 2. data modification (e.g. summarization), 3. data suppression (i.e. removed content), and 4. data overview (i.e. imposing
a hierarchical structure in content to display smaller chunks). Our
proposed approach is a mixture of direct migration (keeping unmodified text), data modification, and data suppression. Note that
these techniques do not include inserting data (e.g. hyphenation),
which is used in the experiments described in this paper.
Traditional summarization and snippet extraction has focused on
extracting key sentences from a text [5]. Snippet extraction is a
popular method for search engines and question answering systems
to show some context for query terms or the exact answers [3].
Most often, snippets are not grammatically correct sentences and
include triplets of periods (“...”) to indicate sequences of omitted
words. Summarization for mobile devices can even limit the result
presentation to a single sentence or key phrase [2, 1], which results
in the loss or change of meaning.
In contrast, our proposed approach focuses on keeping the meaning and removing only irrelevant or redundant parts of the text in
order to shorten it. Document rewriting can even be applied on an
already summarized text to shorten it even further. Thus, our goal
is not to summarize a text, but to make it fit into a limited display.
A related problem is the reduction of text to make it fit into a
given character limit by introducing abbreviations or omitting characters e.g. SMS or Tweets. However, this typically results in text
which is more difficult to comprehend (i.e. so-called “textese”).
To the best of our knowledge, the application of document rewriting techniques for adaptation of result presentation to mobile devices has not been investigated.

3. DOCUMENT REWRITING
We view document rewriting of text as the insertion, deletion, or
modification of characters, words, or phrases of text. (Eliminating
full sentences would result in summarization). We investigate the
following rewriting methods in our experiments:
Synonyms: replace a word with its shortest synonym from WordNet 3.01 , generating the correct full word form based on the CMU
English morphology database (e.g. “vehicle” →“car”).
1

1107

http://wordnet.princeton.edu/

Acronyms: replace an expanded acronym with the shorter acronym,
based on the Vera acronym database2 (e.g. “United Nations” →“UN”).
Simplifications: apply substitution rules compiled from stylistic guidelines and data from the classic Unix tool “diction”3 (4019
rules), which provides support for simplifying and shortening text
(e.g. “in fact” →“ ”, “red in color” →“red”).
Parentheses: delete expressions enclosed in parentheses (e.g.
“Smyth (age 43) ...” →“Smyth ...”).
Numbers: strip commas from numbers and abbreviate numbers
(e.g. “thirteen” →“13”, “100,000” →“100K”).
Whitespace: remove double or redundant whitespace (e.g. space
before a comma).
Hyphens: hyphenate words at end of line, based on TeX hyphenation patterns (e.g. “libraries” →“li-\nbraries”).
For our experiments, we assume that a monospaced font is used
(e.g. the characters “m” and “i” will take up the same width), with
40-80 characters per line. We think that this is a realistic assumption for phones with limited graphics capabilities and even for modern smartphones, because images or advertisements could take up
additional space.
We employ a greedy algorithm for text wrapping, inserting a
linebreak when adding a word to the current line would exceed the
maximum number of characters per line.
For simplicity, we assume that the first word sense (typically the
most frequent one) is correct. We presume that the accuracy of
word sense disambiguation is unrelated to the number of lines or
the average word length which is used in the computation of readability scores. However, we employ morphologic information to
generate the correct word form of the replacement. For example, if
the word “added” in the sense of “respond” is encountered in the
text, the morphological information includes the base form “add”,
the part of speech, person, number, gender, case, and tense. The
WordNet synonym with the shortest full form matching the morphologic information of the original word (i.e. “say”) is then selected as a replacement (i.e. “said”).

4.

EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS

We evaluate our proposed approach to document rewriting using
two types of metrics: readability scores, which indicate how easy
a text is to understand, and the amount of text, which indicates
how much user effort is required to scroll through a list of results.
We calculate Flesch Reading Ease (FRE, where higher values correspond to better readability), Coleman-Liau grade level (CLGL),
and SMOG index4 . FRE is the standard readability formula and
is widely by government agencies, including the US Department
of Defense. SMOG and CLGL both estimate the grade level (i.e.
years of education) a person needs to understand a text, but CLGL
relies on computing the number of characters instead of syllables
per word (which can be computed more accurately than the syllable
count or sentence length).
In addition, we compute the number of lines (# lines) required
to render the text for the original and the rewritten document using
40, 60, and 80 characters per line.
The evaluation is based on three datasets which have been used
for summarization evaluations: a sample of texts from the Brown
corpus (30 documents), a set of full articles from JAIR (141 documents), and a random set of Wikipedia articles (512 documents).
Evaluation results for original (O) and rewritten documents (R) are
shown in Table 1. The asterisk (∗) indicates a significant improve-

Table 1: Readability scores for rewriting documents.
Corpus FRE CLGL SMOG
#lines @ 40/60/80 chars
Brown O 56.84 11.84 12.62
9495 /6226 /4634
Brown R 63.83∗ 10.20∗ 11.49∗ 8694∗ /5746∗ /4291∗
Wiki
Wiki
JAIR
JAIR

O
R
O
R

44.93
51.79∗
48.59
54.34∗

13.24
11.93∗
11.82
10.74∗

13.04
12.32∗
13.72
12.90∗

111156 /72804 /54158
96707∗ /63874∗ /47726∗
282132 /184682 /137270
244570∗ /161429∗ /120513∗

ment over the corresponding metric for the original text (Wilcoxon
test with 95% confidence measure). Note that improvement means
a higher FRE score and lower values for the other metrics. In general, rewriting the text reduces the amount of text while increasing
readability. The number of lines is reduced by 7.4-13.3% for the
tested documents. This can be partially attributed to hyphenation,
which reduces unused whitespace before linebreaks. Surprisingly,
document rewriting also results in increased readability, because
rewriting typically involves removing redundant words and selecting shorter words with fewer characters or syllables. Readability
scores such as FRE are based on average word or sentence length,
which are decreased by document rewriting.

5. CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK
We have shown that applying document rewriting can considerably reduce the amount of text (up to 13.3% compared to the original) while improving the readability of documents. This makes
document rewriting a viable approach to adapting result presentation to devices with limited display size, which can be applied in
addition to summarization to further increase the compression rate.
Future work will include conducting user studies (e.g. measuring reading time and understanding of rewritten documents, when
more aggressive document rewriting techniques such as leaving out
vowels are applied), integrating more advanced natural language
processing (e.g. including NLP for word sense disambiguation,
named entity recognition, and coreference analysis), and investigating the effect of document rewriting on other areas of IR such as
indexing or summarization.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by the Science Foundation of Ireland
(grant 07/CE/I1142) as part of the Centre for Next Generation Localisation (http://www.cngl.ie/).

6. REFERENCES
[1] O. Buyukkokten, O. Kaljuvee, H. Garcia-Molina, A. Paepcke,
and T. Winograd. Efficient web browsing on handheld devices
using page and form summarization. ACM TOIS,
20(1):82–115, 2002.
[2] M. Jones, G. Buchanan, and N. Mohd-Nasir. An evaluation of
WebTwig - a site outliner for handheld web access. In
HUC’99, volume 1707 of LNCS, pages 343–345. Springer,
1999.
[3] Q. Li, K. S. Candan, and Q. Yan. Extracting relevant snippets
for web navigation. In AAAI’08, pages 1195–1200. AAAI,
2008.
[4] B. Mackay and C. Watters. The impact of migration of data to
small screens on navigation. IT & Society, 1(3):90–101, 2003.
[5] M. Sanderson. Accurate user directed summarizatiion from
existing tools. In CIKM 1998, pages 45–51. ACM, 1998.

2

ftp://prep.ai.mit.edu/pub/gnu/vera/
http://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/diction/
4
http://www.readabilityformulas.com/
3

1108

