Queries Without Clicks: Evaluating Retrieval Effectiveness
Based on User Feedback
Athanasia Koumpouri

Vasiliki Simaki

Department of Computer Engineering and Informatics
University of Patras
26500, Patras, Greece
+30 2610 996991

Department of Computer Engineering and Informatics
University of Patras
26500, Patras, Greece
+30 2610 996994

koumpour@ceid.upatras.gr

simaki@ceid.upatras.gr

ABSTRACT

2.
2.1

Until recently, the lack of user activity on search results was
perceived as a sign of user dissatisfaction from retrieval
performance. However, recent studies have reported that some
queries might not be followed by clicks to the content of the
retrieved results, because the search task can be satisfied in the list
of retrieved results the user views without the need to click
through them. In this paper, we propose a method for evaluating
user satisfaction from the results of searches that are not followed
by clickthrough activity to the retrieved results. We found that
there is a strong association between some implicit measures of
user activity and user’s explicit satisfaction judgments. Moreover,
we developed a predictive model of user satisfaction based on
implicit measures, achieving accuracy up to 86%.

METHODOLOGY
Implicit user feedback

In order to gather the data required for this study (both implicit
measures and explicit feedback), we developed a web browser,
called QWC Browser. We recruited 18 participants that
represented the average web searcher and we installed the QWC
Browser on their computers. Then, we asked participants to
conduct their web searches as they would normally do and use
Google as search engine. We explained to them that we would
record their searches respecting their privacy and anonymity. Our
data collection lasted 4 weeks.
The idea of utilizing the searcher post-query activity on the
returned results as an indicator of implicit relevance judgments is
not new [1],[2]. QWC Browser allows us to record users’ actions
as they conduct their searches on the Web. Actions included
scrolling (both vertical and horizontal), time spent on results page,
bookmark, print, move to next results page, time spent moving
mouse and copy text from titles or snippets.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
D.3.3 [Queries and Query Analysis]: Question answering
[Evaluation]: Effectiveness measures, experimental design.

General Terms
Measurement, Design, Experimentation, Human Factors.

2.2

Keywords

At the same time, we conducted a user study to identify search
tasks related to queries that are not followed by clicks on the
retrieved results. Therefore, we examined for which search tasks
the user’s information needs can be satisfied in the contents of the
displayed results. For every query recorded, we asked the
participants to answer in four questions presented to them via popup questionnaire during their search. The first question attempts to
capture the user’s search goal from a defined list of possible web
search tasks. The second one aims to capture user’s intention of
clicking or not. The third question asks the user if he did click on
the displayed results or not. Finally, the last question (prompt only
if the answer in previous question is no) captures the reason for
not clicking.

positive search abandonment, implicit feedback, explicit
feedback, user satisfaction, retrieval effectiveness, user activity.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Recently, researchers highlighted the need to discriminate
between successful and failed searches that are not followed by
clicks to the content of the retrieved results [3], [4]. They have
reported that the user's inactivity on search results should not be
interpreted as a sign of dissatisfaction from retrieval performance.
To this respect, we conducted a user study in order to identify the
search intentions of queries without follow-up clicks to any of the
results returned. We also attempt to identify the search tasks that
can be accomplished successfully based entirely on information
provided on the results page. Additionally, we developed an
instrumented browser, QWC Browser, to collect various measures
indicative of user activity after the query submission. Moreover,
we examine whether explicit judgments of user satisfaction are
associated to implicit measures of user interest in order to
understand which implicit measures are most strongly associated
to user satisfaction. Finally, we use Bayesian modeling techniques
to develop predictive models in order to capture user satisfaction
from searches that are not followed by clicks to the retrieved
results.

2.3

Explicit user feedback

Predictive models

We examined whether there is an association between implicit
measures of user activity and user’s explicit satisfaction
judgments. Our objective is to model which implicit measures
best predict user satisfaction from queries not followed by clicks.
Based on previous studies on this field [2], we built a Bayesian
network model using the collected implicit interest indicators as
input
to
predict
user’s
explicit
judgment
of
satisfaction/dissatisfaction.

3.

EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

Our findings indicate that in 29.32% of the queries users did not
click on any of the retrieved results, either because they were
looking for a quick answer to their question in titles and/or
snippets retrieved or because their information needs were
satisfied by the functionality that the predefined search engine

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

1133

As shown in Picture 1, in 81.5% of the cases that a user spends
more than 26 seconds in results page, scrolls more than 7.4secs
and copies text from snippets/titles, the retrieved results satisfy his
information needs without clicking. We also noticed that there
were implicit measures such as print, bookmark and move to next
page highly correlated with satisfaction (almost 100% accuracy),
but very infrequent (less than 2% of the dataset cases). As
described above, we learned a Bayesian model to predict user’s
satisfaction by using the implicit measures as input variables. The
learned model combining all the implicit measures, described in
Section 2.1, was able to predict satisfaction in 86% of cases.

offers (image, news, linguistics). Moreover, we observed that in
some cases the search task has a strong association with the user's
predetermined intention to click or not (42% of informational task
intent not to click, 27% of quick answer intent to click).
Additionally, user satisfaction from queries without click,
summarized in Table 1, indicates that the lack of clickthrough
activity on retrieved results for some types of searches
(informational, navigational, transactional and repeat) is a strong
sign of user dissatisfaction.
Search Tasks

% Satisfaction

Informational

0.41%

Navigational

1.05%

Transactional

0.66%

Image

60.31%

News

67.48%

Person

52.21%

Linguistic

99.5%

Quick answer

87.12%

Update

31.22%

Repeat

1.76%

4.

CONCLUSIONS

The objective of our research is to show that search
abandonment should not uniformly be considered as a negative
signal of user satisfaction about retrieval performance. Our
findings indicate that in nearly 80% of all searches conducted with
initial intention not to click, the user's information need was
successfully addressed by the displayed results. In addition, about
45% of all searches not followed by clicks, achieve to find the
desired information in the search results’ list.
Furthermore, we found that time spent on the results page, the
total scrolling time and copying text from titles and/or snippets are
the best predictors of user satisfaction. We plan to conduct
additional studies using different search engines in order to
generalize our findings. Moreover, we aim to measure explicit
user satisfaction more accurately by using a 1-5 rating scale and
detect additional implicit measures, such us query-title overlap,
query-snippet overlap, etc. in order to capture user activity more
precisely.

Table 1. The user satisfaction in several search tasks

5.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to acknowledge the help of Lecturer Sofia Stamou
for motivating and encouraging us, as well as the participants of
our survey.

As an example, let “convert 233.50 usd to euros”, “Robert
Pattinson” be two queries submitted by our participants and their
search task were defined as Quick answer and Image relatively. In
both cases, the user had no intention to click on the retrieved
results and he did so, declaring his satisfaction about the search
results. We found that time spent on results page, total time
scrolling and copying text from titles and/or snippets are the
indicators mostly associated with user’s explicit satisfaction
judgments.

6.

REFERENCES

[1] Claypool, M., Lee, P., Wased, M., and Brown, D. 2001.
Implicit interest indicators. In Proceedings on the
International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces. Santa
Fe, NM.
[2] Fox, S., Karnawat, K., Mydland, M., Dumais, S. and White,
T. 2005. Evaluating implicit measures to improve Web
search. ACM Transactions on Information System.
[3] Li, J., Huffman, S. B., and Tokuda, A. 2009. Good
abandonment in mobile and PC internet search. In
Proceedings of the 32nd Annual International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval, Boston, MA, USA.
[4] Stamou, S. and Efthimiadis, E. 2010. Interpreting user
inactivity on search results In Proceedings of the Advances
in Information Retrieval, 32nd European Conference on IR
Research, volume 5993 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, 100-113.

Picture 1. Decision Tree for queries without clicks

1134

