Retrieval Evaluation on Focused Tasks
Besnik Fetahu

Ralf Schenkel

Graduate School of Computer Science,
Saarland University
Saarbrücken, Germany

Saarland University
Saarbrücken, Germany

schenkel@mmci.uni-saarland.de

bfetahu@mmci.uni-saarland.de

ABSTRACT

(1) Old point of 0.01 recall:
80 rel chars, iP[0.01]=1.0

Ranking of retrieval systems for focused tasks requires large
number of relevance judgments. We propose an approach
that minimizes the number of relevance judgments, where
the performance measures are approximated using a MonteCarlo sampling technique. Partial measures are taken using
relevance judgments, whereas the remaining part of passages
are annotated using a generated relevance probability distribution based on result rank. We define two conditions
for stopping the assessment procedure when the ranking between systems is stable.

…
1
(2) New point of 0.01 recall: (3) New point of 0.01 recall:
100 rel chars, iP[0.01]=0.7 130 rel chars, iP[0.01]=0.8

Figure 1: Example for non-monotonicity of iP
In this poster we extend the idea of MTC towards focused
retrieval and recall-based metrics, and show that comparable system rankings can be computed with much less assessments that currently done.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: H.3.4 Systems and Software: Performance Evaluation

2.

Keywords
Information Retrieval, Evaluation, Ranking, Algorithms

1.

EVALUATION METRICS

We use interpolated precision (iP) at different recall
levels, a standard evaluation measure for Focused Tasks [4].
Here, the recall base is the set of all relevant characters for
a topic (collected during assessment), and each rank of the
result list is assigned recall (fraction of all relevant characters
retrieved up to this rank) and precision (ratio of retrieved
relevant to all retrieved characters up to this rank). The
metric is evaluated at recall levels x ∈ {0, 0.01, . . . , 1.0},
and the value at recall level x is the highest precision at any
rank with recall at least x. Additionally, average precision
AiP over all recall points and mean average precision M AiP
over all topics are defined. Please see [4] for the full formal
definitions.

INTRODUCTION

We consider the problem of comparing retrieval systems
for focused tasks, where not complete documents, but focused fragments of documents are retrieved. For building
existing benchmark collections such as INEX [3], relevance
judgments on the level of passages are created by human
annotators or, recently, using crowdsourcing [1, 5]. A large
number of documents are considered for assessment for each
topic (500-750 at INEX), which makes the assessment procedure very work intensive (and expensive if done with crowdsourcing). Recent results [6] indicate that much smaller
pools yield largely similar rankings of systems, but still in
the order of 50 documents per topic need to be assessed.
For document-level retrieval, an interesting idea to reduce
assessment effort was proposed in [2], which proposes to determine a minimal set of documents (MTC) that have the
highest impact on average precision at a given rank. However, focused tasks are often not evaluated with rank-based
quality metrics, but with recall-based measures such as interpolated precision (iP) [4] evaluated at a fixed set of recall
levels. Unlike precision at a rank, iP is not monotonic in
the number of assessments, i.e., the iP of a run can decrease
when additional relevant passages are identified even outside
the run. Figure 2 shows an example for this, where an initial
iP[0.01] of 1.0 (1) first drops to 0.7 (2) when another relevant passage is found (and recall grows), and then increases
again (3) with the next relevant passage.

3.

OUR METHOD

We now present our method that, given a set of runs
A, B, . . . , N for a set of topics, selects passages from these
runs to assess and finally builds a ranking of the runs.

3.1

Document Selection

We want to assess only the passages that have most impact
on system ranking. To achieve this we first create, a pool of
unique passages retrieved from all systems on all topics. We
then compute the impact on iP of assessing each passage for
each run where it appears (considering other non-assessed
passages as non-relevant). If a passage appears in multiple
systems (A . . . N ) its weight is constructed by the pairwise
difference of each individual weight (as the precision of a system up to that point) in all systems, shown here for some
system c (n is the number of systems in which the passage
does not appear). The highest weight is assigned to a passage (from the passage weights computed at other systems):

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

∆iP = |iPA − iPB | + · · · + |iPN −1 − iPN | + n ∗ iPc

1135

iteration
iter-1
iter-2
iter-3
PoolSize-55

We then select a number k of passages for each topic, sorted
by the weight defined above. This is repeated until all systems are marked as stable by one of the stopping conditions.

3.2

Approximated Metrics

iP[0.05]
87.54
89.59
90.44
88.31

iP[0.10]
91.17
92.62
93.35
90.64

Stopping Conditions

Our method runs in iterations where in each iteration,
k documents from each non-stable system are chosen for
assessment. After each iteration, partial and approximated
iP are computed, and we check if we can stop based on two
stopping conditions:

Figure 2: τ -coefficient on all 101 recall points.

- Test Statistics: We statistically compare partial iP to
approximated iP, where we test the hypothesis if they are
approximately similar to each other. H0 : AiP = E[AiP ],
and H1 : AiP 6= E[AiP ]. It is expected that the null
hypothesis is rejected in most cases due to the difference
in partial and approximated measures.

5.

CONCLUSIONS

The main goal of our was to rank multiple systems with
minimal number of relevance judgments for focused retrieval.
We proposed a new algorithm for selecting passages for assessment under recall-based evaluation metrics such as interpolated precision. We iteratively pick new passages to
assess until all systems achieved a stable ranking, based on
two stopping conditions.

- Pairwise Measure Comparison: We compare if partial
and approximated iP agree pairwise on the ranking of a
system compared to all other systems. If that is the case,
that system is marked as stable. We can stop if all systems
are marked as stable, i.e., if the ranking computed from the
partial measure agrees with the ranking computed from
the approximated measure.

4.

iP[0.01]
88.87
90.8
91.65
90.64

Table 1: τ -coefficient on official recall points.

We now explain how to compute an approximated value
for interpolated precision when only a subset of all passages
have been assessed. A first alternative would be to consider
partial iP, where unassessed passages are set to not relevant, but this is too simplistic since many passages at early
ranks will be unassessed in the initial rounds of our method.
Instead, we use Monte Carlo sampling to compute an estimated iP value. Here, the relevance of unassessed passages is
considered a random variable, with a probability of relevance
based on the rank on which they appear. The number of
samples N was specified using the absolute -approximation,
which approximates the measures with probability at least
1 − δ, where  = 0.1, and δ = 0.9. An initial analysis with
the INEX’08 runs (considering a passage as relevant when it
contained at least one relevant character) showed that this
probability is exponentially decaying with increasing rank.

3.3

iP[0.00]
87.66
92.38
93.71
93.80

6.

REFERENCES

[1] Omar Alonso, Ralf Schenkel, and Martin Theobald.
Crowdsourcing assessments for xml ranked retrieval. In
ECIR, pages 602–606, 2010.
[2] Ben Carterette, James Allan, and Ramesh K.
Sitaraman. Minimal test collections for retrieval
evaluation. In SIGIR, pages 268–275, 2006.
[3] Shlomo Geva, Jaap Kamps, Miro Lehtonen, Ralf
Schenkel, James A. Thom, and Andrew Trotman.
Overview of the inex 2009 ad hoc track. In INEX,
pages 4–25, 2009.
[4] Jaap Kamps, Jovan Pehcevski, Gabriella Kazai,
Mounia Lalmas, and Stephen Robertson. Inex 2007
evaluation measures. In INEX, pages 24–33, 2007.
[5] Gabriella Kazai, Jaap Kamps, Marijn Koolen, and
Natasa Milic-Frayling. Crowdsourcing for book search
evaluation: impact of hit design on comparative system
ranking. In SIGIR, pages 205–214, 2011.
[6] Sukomal Pal, Mandar Mitra, and Jaap Kamps.
Evaluation effort, reliability and reusability in xml
retrieval. JASIST, 62(2):375–394, 2011.

RESULTS & DISCUSSIONS

We evaluated our method with data from the Focused
Task of the INEX 2009 AdHoc track [3], which consisted
of 68 topics. The comparison performance of systems on
topic level was measured based on AiP. The rank probability distribution was constructed using INEX’08 data. In total only 4080 relevance judgments, with approx.60 per topic,
were needed until the stopping condition fired after 3 iterations (we stopped when more than half of the systems were
marked as stable). We compared the produced ranking to
the ranking with full INEX assessments (restricted to a standard pool of size 500 built for the considered runs) using
Kendall’s τ correlation. Figure 2 shows the correlation for
all recall points, and Table 1 shows the correlation at four
selected recall points after each iteration, and for PoolSize55 (which uses 60 assessments per topic). It is evident that
our method reaches an agreement level of 0.9. It is also
more effective than standard INEX pooling with 50 documents per topic, which achieves a correlation slightly below
0.9 (Figure 2).

1136

