Short Text Classiﬁcation Using Very Few Words

∗

Aixin Sun

School of Computer Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

axsun@ntu.edu.sg

ABSTRACT

  
 

We propose a simple, scalable, and non-parametric approach for
short text classiﬁcation. Leveraging the well studied and scalable
Information Retrieval (IR) framework, our approach mimics human labeling process for a piece of short text. It ﬁrst selects the
most representative and topical-indicative words from a given short
text as query words, and then searches for a small set of labeled
short texts best matching the query words. The predicted category label is the majority vote of the search results. Evaluated
on a collection of more than 12K Web snippets, the proposed approach achieves comparable classiﬁcation accuracy with the baseline Maximum Entropy classiﬁer using as few as 3 query words and
top-5 best matching search hits. Among the four query word selection schemes proposed and evaluated in our experiments, term frequency together with clarity gives the best classiﬁcation accuracy.





 



 

mimic the human labeling process. Due to the length of short text
(e.g., a search result snippet is usually fewer than 20 words, a tweet
has at most 140 characters), one ﬁnishes reading a piece of short
text at a glance; the category label is assigned mainly based on
the few keywords observed from the short text. More speciﬁcally,
given a short text, we identify one or more words that best represent the short text and formulate a weighted word query using each
selected word and its associated weight. Illustrated in Figure 2, this
query is submitted to a local search engine for the best matching labeled examples. Analogous to the widely used k-nearest-neighbor
(kNN) classiﬁer, the predicted category is the one receiving highest
votes from the search results (i.e., labeled short texts).
Leveraging the well studied IR techniques, the proposed approach
is extremely scalable. More importantly, the lazy and non-parametric
approach well accommodates fast updating of labeled examples,
changes to the classiﬁcation scheme (e.g., adding a new category),
as well as giving speciﬁc attention to certain groups of labeled examples by changing the scoring function in the search (e.g., a search
may favor more recently added labeled examples). Note that, different from kNN classiﬁers, our approach requires no computation
of the nearest neighbors in the labeled data. Instead, we search for
the top-H best hits using few query words.

H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search
and Retrieval—Information ﬁltering

Keywords
Short Text Classiﬁcation, Search and Vote

INTRODUCTION

We are now dealing with much more short texts. Examples are
snippets in search results, tweets, status updates, comments, and
reviews from various social platforms. Short texts are in general
much shorter, nosier, and sparser, which calls for a revisit of many
fundamental text mining techniques including text classﬁication.
Short text classiﬁcation is to assign a piece of short text one or
more predeﬁned categories. Most existing approaches try to enrich
the representation of a short text using additional semantics. The
semantics could be derived internally from the short text collection [3], externally from a collection of much longer documents in
a similar domain as the short texts [5], or from much larger external
sources such as Wikipedia and WordNet [1, 3, 4]. In [1, 4], the classiﬁcation accuracy is signiﬁcantly improved by enriching short text
feature vector with relevant hidden topics derived from Wikipedia
pages using topic model.
In the opposite direction of enriching short text representation,
we propose to trim a short text representation to get a few most
representative words for topical classiﬁcation. This approach is to
∗




Figure 2: The search and vote framework

Categories and Subject Descriptors

1.

   

  

2.

SEARCH AND VOTE

Query Word Selection. The most critical step in the proposed approach is the selection of representative words from a short text as
query words. Ideally, the query words should be (i) well representing the main content of the short text, and (ii) topically indicative.
A word is topically indicative if it is about a speciﬁc topic.
With bag-of-words representation, the most widely used T F or
T F.IDF weighting scheme is suﬃcient for the ﬁrst requirement.
For the second requirement, we propose to use clarity to measure
the topical-speciﬁcity of a word. Proposed for predicting query performance in [2], the clarity score of a query is the Kullback-Leibler
(KL) divergence between the query language model (i.e., unigram
distribution of word occurrences) and collection language model.
The former is inferred from a set of documents best matching a
given query and the latter from the entire collection. Given a short
text data collection D. Let word w be a candidate word for selection, we use w as a single-term query to retrieve its top-N most

This work was supported by MINDEF-NTU-DIRP/2010/03.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

1145

0.75

TF
TF.IDF
TF.CLARITY
TF.IDF.CLARITY

0.65
0.6
0.55
0.5
0.45
0.4
0.35

1 Word

3 Words

5 Words

7 Words

0.7
0.65
0.6
0.55
0.5
0.45
0.4
0.35

9 Words

(a) Category voting by top-5 hits

0.75
Classification Accuracy (Top-15 hits)

0.7

Classification Accuracy (Top-10 hits)

Classification Accuracy (Top-5 hits)

0.75

1 Word

3 Words

5 Words

7 Words

9 Words

(b) Category voting by top-10 hits

0.7
0.65
0.6
0.55
0.5
0.45
0.4
0.35

1 Word

3 Words

5 Words

7 Words

9 Words

(c) Category voting by top-15 hits

Figure 1: The classiﬁcation accuracy voted by top-{5, 10, 15} hits respectively using {1, 3, 5, 7, 9} words as query
tal line plotted in the three ﬁgures indicates the accuracy of 0.6575
achieved by Maximum Entropy (MaxEnt) classiﬁer as baseline [4].
From the results, we make the following observations. First,
more words (from 1 word to 5 words) in query generally lead to
better classiﬁcation accuracy. The improvement becomes very minor when more than 5 words are used in query. Observe that using
3 words, the classiﬁcation accuracy voted by top-5 hits matches
MaxEnt, an advanced model that has shown good classiﬁcation accuracies in many applications. Second, using 1 word in query, more
hits lead to poorer results. When more than 3 words are selected
in query, more hits yield slightly better accuracy. Third, among all
word selection schemes, T F.CLARITY outperforms the others in
most runs when 3 or more words are used in query. For one word
query, T F.IDF.CLARITY is the best scheme.
We note that the best classiﬁcation accuracy achieved is better than MaxEnt, but poorer than the results reported on the same
dataset using enriched short text representation [1]. The enriched
representation is a combination of word feature from the short text,
and topic feature from a topic space derived from Wikipedia. We
argue that our approach is directly applicable to any enriched representation because each enriched feature (e.g., a topic feature) can
be selected as a query word. That is, our approach complements
the approach enriching text representation.

Table 1: Number of training/test snippets in the 8 categories.
Category
Business
Computer
Health
Sports

#Train
1200
1200
880
1120

#Test
300
300
300
300

Category
Culture-Arts-Ent
Education-Science
Engineering
Politics-Society

#Train
1880
2360
220
1200

#Test
330
300
150
300

relevant documents (N = 20 in our experiments1 ), denoted by Qw .
The clarity score of word w is computed using the equation below,
where V denotes the vocabulary.
Clarity(w) =


w ∈V

P(w |Qw ) log

P(w |Qw )
P(w |D)

Intuitively, if w is speciﬁc to a topic, then the documents matching
w share a common topic indicated by a few words with very high
probabilities of occurrences against their probabilities in the entire
collection. On the other hand, if the documents matching w do not
share a common topic, then this set of documents is analogous to a
random sample from the document collection, with similar distributions of word occurrences.
Scoring and Voting. In literature, many scoring functions for relevance ranking have been proposed for document search. To search
for the most relevant labeled examples for a given query, we use
the default scoring function implemented in Lucene2 . Note that,
Lucene allows query word boosting, i.e., to assign weight to each
query word in a multi-term query. The score computed in query
word selection step is used to weigh each selected query word. After query execution, each category label of the returned documents
serves as an evidence that supports the likelihood of the querying
document belonging to that category. Majority voting shows better
results than its weighted counterpart in our experiments.

3.

4.

EXPERIMENTS

We conducted experiments on the Web snippet dataset that has
been used in [1, 4]. The dataset consists of 10,060 train and 2,280
test snippets from 8 categories, shown in Table 1. On average, each
snippet has 18.07 words after indexing by Lucene.
We evaluate four schemes to select query words: T F, T F.IDF,
T F.CLARITY , and T F.IDF.CLARITY . The latter two are the product of T F and T F.IDF respectively with clarity score. For each
scheme, the top {1, 3, 5, 7, 9} words with highest scores are selected as query words. The category label of a test snippet is voted
by the top-{5, 10, 15} hits respectively. The classiﬁcation accuracies are reported in Figures 1(a), 1(b), and 1(c). Note that, as each
snippet has exactly one category label, the reported accuracy is the
same as Micro-Precision/Recall/F1 . For comparison, the horizon1
2

SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK

We propose a simple, scalable, and non-parametric approach for
short text classiﬁcation. Using the simple T F.CLARITY to select as
few as 3 words, the default Lucene scoring function, and majority
voting from 5 search hits, our approach achieves comparable classiﬁcation accuracy with MaxEnt classiﬁer. We also note that our
approach complements the research on enriching short text representation. Moreover, the non-parametric approach oﬀers much
more ﬂexibility in handling updates in labeled examples and classiﬁcation schemes.
The proposed approach has great potential to achieve much better results with more research on (i) query word or phrase selection, (ii) relevance ranking techniques speciﬁcally for short texts,
and (iii) short text representation enrichment.

5.

REFERENCES

[1] M. Chen, X. Jin, and D. Shen. Short text classiﬁcation improved by
learning multi-granularity topics. In IJCAI, pages 1776–1781, 2011.
[2] S. Cronen-Townsend, Y. Zhou, and W. B. Croft. Predicting query
performance. In SIGIR, pages 299–306, 2002.
[3] X. Hu, N. Sun, C. Zhang, and T.-S. Chua. Exploiting internal and
external semantics for the clustering of short texts using world
knowledge. In CIKM, pages 919–928, 2009.
[4] X. H. Phan, M. L. Nguyen, and S. Horiguchi. Learning to classify
short and sparse text & web with hidden topics from large-scale data
collections. In WWW, pages 91–100, 2008.
[5] S. Zelikovitz, W. W. Cohen, and H. Hirsh. Extending WHIRL with
background knowledge for improved text classiﬁcation. Information
Retrieval, 10(1):35–67, 2007.

If a word appears in fewer than 20 documents, its clarity score is set to 1.0.
http://lucene.apache.org/core/

1146

