Twanchor Text: A Preliminary Study
of the Value of Tweets as Anchor Text
Gilad Mishne and Jimmy Lin
Twitter, Inc.

@gilad @lintool

Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.3.3 Information
Storage and Retrieval: Information Search and Retrieval
General Terms: Algorithms, Experimentation
Keywords: real-time search, document enrichment

1.

rich relevance signal for ranking. In contrast, for real-time
text processing applications, tweet text contains relevance
signals that are unlikely to be found anywhere else at the
time the tweet was posted.
We present, to our knowledge, the first systematic characterization of the phenomenon of tweets as anchor text,
which we dub “twanchor text”. Our goal is to convince the
reader that there is substantial value in twanchor text for
search and other text mining tasks. Due to limited space,
we stop short of actual extrinsic evaluation in an end-to-end
application, but present our arguments in terms of statistical
characterization of twanchor text content.

INTRODUCTION

A common practice in web search is enriching document
representations with incoming anchor text, aggregated in
some manner [5, 4], so that the anchor text “field” is available at ranking time. In this paper, we present a preliminary investigation of the value of tweets and tweet conversations as anchor text. Twitter is a communications
platform on which users exchange 140-characters messages
(called tweets). It is often used as a broadcast mechanism to
publicize newly-published web pages: for example, the website techcrunch.com might tweet a link (URL) to a breaking
technology-related news story as soon as the page is posted
on the web, as a way to generate traffic to the site. In a
sense, the tweet text itself serves the same role as traditional
anchor text to the web page.
For the most part, tweets with links serve primarily to
alert followers (recipients) to the presence of new stories and
contain little more than article titles. A typical example is:

Related Work. An early study of anchor text—focusing
on differences between anchors and the landing page—was
presented in [2]. Although tweets have not been used as
or compared to anchors, several other similar sources of information have, including social annotations [3] and search
queries [1]. Finally, a search system based on indexing tweets
instead of the linked documents was recently discussed in [6].

2.

METHODOLOGY

We’ve developed SpiderDuck, a high-throughput fetcher
that listens to the Twitter firehose (stream of all tweets) and
downloads the content of all URLs found in tweets.1 This
itself is a non-trivial engineering challenge due to the high
throughput demands and usage of URL shortening services,
but these issues are beyond the scope of this paper.
Our collection consists of all links tweeted in the month of
January 2012. Many of the tweeted URLs point to photos
and other media, which are not relevant for our analysis.
Since we are primarily interested in new web pages of high
quality, we restrict our attention to a list of approximately
15K news domains, constructed semi-automatically (again,
for space constraints we omit the details). Over the entire
month, we observe about 7.1 million unique resolved URLs,
in 123M tweets, from these hosts. Additional statistics are
provided in Table 1. We emphasize that this figure is arrived
at after resolving the target of shortened links; frequently,
especially for popular pages, multiple users independently
tweet different shortened URLs to the same page. For each
page, we collected the following:

 Obama Signs Defense Bill Despite ‘Serious Reservations’ huff.to/uiGfU4 via @huffingtonpost

However, tweets often generate discussion, providing a rich
source of content terms not directly found in the article itself.
Consider the following tweets, referencing the same article
or responding to a previous tweet that referenced it:
 The “war on terror” is lost. The terrorists have won:
Obama Signs Defense Bill [link] #NDAA #StateTerror
 So now we are suspending habeas corpus? [link]
 @MGhasspoken 1022 in the NDAA exempts US citizens from military detention but not from law enforcement detention

In the case of breaking news stories, anchor text is hard
to acquire, primarily because new web pages require time
to accumulate inbound links. A notable exception is a news
site linking to new articles from other new articles (or from
a portal page), but anchor text from this type of linking
behavior usually consists only of the title, which is uninteresting. The lack of interesting anchor text means that web
search engines cannot take advantage of what is typically a

• The title of the web page.
• Text content of the web page (after removing tags, js, etc.)
• Tweets linking to the page.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

1
http://engineering.twitter.com/2011/11/spiderduck-twittersreal-time-url.html

1159

Table 2: Twanchor text contribution

Table 1: Twanchor text corpus
URLs
with titles
with anchor text
with replies
with 2nd-degree replies
with 3rd-degree replies
Tweets
with replies
with 2nd-degree replies
with 3rd-degree replies

7.12M
7.09M
(99%)
717K
(10%)
1.28M
(18%)
500K
(7%)
297K
(4%)
123M
6.84M
(5.6%)
1.95M
(1.6%)
1.05M
(0.9%)

Source
Head
Anchors
Twanchors
Conversations
Torso
Anchors
Twanchors
Conversations
Tail
Anchors
Twanchors
Conversations
All URLs
Anchors
Twanchors
Conversations

• Tweet conversations around the link, up to three levels.
The first level is defined as all tweets in response to the
original tweet containing the link. The second level is
defined as all responses to first level tweets, and so on.
• Anchor text to the web page. Note that we are restricted
to extracting anchor text from other pages that have been
tweeted (SpiderDuck is not a general-purpose web crawler).
By definition these anchor texts are limited in scope (but
see previous discussion).

Number of new terms
1–9
10+
Mean

78.5%
0.5%
1.5%

20.2%
0.4%
2.6%

1.3%
99.1%
95.9%

0.98
272.8
219.4

91.5%
2.8%
54.8%

7.8%
34.9%
14.5%

0.7%
62.3%
30.7%

0.37
22.5
12.4

98.1%
29.5%
93.5%

1.8%
63.5%
3.4%

0.1%
7.0%
3.1%

0.05
3.1
0.85

96.1%
22.4%
82.3%

3.6%
55.3%
11.5%

0.3%
22.3%
6.2%

0.15
12.3
7.3

Table 3: Twanchor text contribution; queried terms
Source
Anchors
Twanchors
Conversations

To measure the potential contribution of twanchor text
in the context of search, we focus on new terms introduced
through these texts: that is, terms included in the tweets and
their replies that are not part of the web page itself (or its
title). Our argument is simple: in the case of real-time search
(and unlike web search), recall plays as important a role as
precision, and so the more relevant terms are available for
retrieving the document, the better.
Note that there are other potential gains from using twanchors. For example, although a particular term may already
appear in the page text, its inclusion in referencing tweets
may signal increased importance. Other more complex approaches (such as measuring the diversity among twanchors)
may also prove useful, and while we believe this is the case,
it is beyond the scope of this short piece. We note that conversations around an article often expresses sentiment, from
which we can gauge users’ responses to the content. Finally,
twanchor text and conversations often contain hashtags, a
Twitter convention that can be treated as topic-labels for
semi-supervised machine-learning purposes.

3.

0

New queried-terms
0
1–9
10+
Mean
97.1%
2.8%
0.1%
0.1
31.2%
53.5%
15.3%
7.4
82.7%
7.8%
9.5%
4.8

tweets referencing torso and tail URLs exceeds the number
referencing head ones. The paucity of information available
to traditional web search engines (without Twitter signals)
limits effectiveness in retrieving those pages.
Clearly, not all new terms added are indeed useful in a
retrieval setting; stopwords and other function words that
are common on Twitter (e.g., “RT”, an abbreviation for
“retweet”) do not contribute much. In Table 3 we repeat our
evaluation, this time limiting the new terms to new queried
terms—that is, terms that appeared in a search query issued by at least 1000 unique users to twitter.com over the
same month our data was collected on. We omit the breakdown into head, torso, and tail, but the numbers are proportional to those shown in Table 2: the majority of newlyavailable terms (about two-thirds, on average) are terms actually found in common queries.

4.

CONCLUSIONS

Using a simple proxy—the amount of additional textual
content—we demonstrate that, at least in the case of newscentric search, tweets referencing web pages provide a valuable source of content not found in the pages themselves.
Using such tweets as “twanchors” improves significantly over
using anchors themselves, particularly for long-tail pages
that may have few other external information sources. In
follow-up work we will show how to utilize twanchors in a
full retrieval setup, using additional information present in
tweets referencing web pages (e.g., raw counts).

RESULTS

Table 2 shows the potential contributions of direct twanchor text, as well as that of surrounding conversations. For
each potential content source (anchors, twanchors, and conversations) we show the average number of new terms added
to a URL, as well as break down the contribution to the
fraction of URLs that has no new terms, the fraction that
has fewer than 10 new ones, and the fraction that has 10
or more new terms. Furthermore, we separately show the
contribution to three types of URLs: head, defined as URLs
appearing in 100 or more tweets; tail, URLs appearing in
5 or fewer tweets, and torso—everything else. The corpus
breakdown is 0.5% head, 13.1% torso, and 86.4% tail.
The potential gains from twanchors are substantial: tweets
and their replies contribute new terms significantly more
than anchor text, consistently across the board. Although
the contribution to head URLs is the strongest, we are particularly encouraged by the contribution to torso and tail
URLs. Top news pages tend to be discovered and ranked effectively by search engines due to an abundance of incoming
links and high-quality hosts; not so for lower-tier articles.
Nevertheless, these still engage many users—the number of

5.

REFERENCES

[1] E. Amitay, A. Darlow, D. Konopnicki, and U. Weiss. Queries as
anchors: selection by association. In Hypertext, 2005.
[2] N. Eiron and K. McCurley. Analysis of anchor text for web
search. In SIGIR, 2003.
[3] P. Heymann, G. Koutrika, and H. Garcia-Molina. Can social
bookmarking improve web search? In WSDM, 2008.
[4] M. Koolen and J. Kamps. The importance of anchor text for ad
hoc search revisited. In SIGIR, 2010.
[5] D. Metzler, J. Novak, H. Cui, and S. Reddy. Building enriched
document representations using aggregated anchor text. In
SIGIR, 2009.
[6] T. Rowlands, D. Hawking, and R. Sankaranarayana. New-web
search with microblog annotations. In WWW, 2010.

1160

