Using Eye-Tracking with Dynamic Areas of Interest for
Analyzing Interactive Information Retrieval
Vu T. Tran

Norbert Fuhr

Information Engineering
University of Duisburg-Essen
Duisburg, Germany

Information Engineering
University of Duisburg-Essen
Duisburg, Germany

vtran@is.inf.uni-due.de

norbert.fuhr@uni-due.de

ABSTRACT

Cutrell and Guang [4] used eye-tracking to explore the effects of diﬀerent presentations of search results. Joachims
et al. [5] examined the reliability of click-through data for
implicit relevance feedback of a web search engine by comparing them to eye-tracking data.

Based on a new framework for capturing dynamic areas of
interest in eye-tracking, we model the user search process
as a Markov-chain. The analysis indicates possible system
improvements and yields parameter estimates for the Interactive Probability Ranking Principle (IPRP).

2.
Categories and Subject Descriptors

EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN

For our experiments, we used a collection based on a crawl
of 2.7 million records from the book database of the online
bookseller Amazon.com. As test subjects, we recruited 12
students of computer science, cognitive and communication
science and related ﬁelds. After an introduction into the
system, users had to work on three tasks, with a time limit
of 20 minutes per task (rotating tasks in a Latin square
design). Due to space limitations, we only discuss the results
of the ‘complex’ task type here, where users were asked to
ﬁnd books about one of the following topics: 1) Trustworthy
books about 9/11 terrorist attacks, 2) Controversial books
discussing the climate change, 3) Highly acclaimed novels
about racial discrimination.
The user interface of our system consists of four major
areas: a query input ﬁeld, a list of result items, a detail
area showing all available data about the currently selected
document, and a basket where users should place documents they deemed relevant. We wanted to collect eyetracking data for each speciﬁc result list item, even when
the user is scrolling down in this list; however, standard
eye-tracking software allows only for the monitoring of static
‘areas of interest’ (AOI). Thus, we developed a framework
called AOILog which automatically keeps track of position,
visibility and size of all user interface objects at any point
in time. Combining this information with the eye-tracking
data, we always know at which object the user is currently
looking.1

H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information
Search and Retrieval—Search Process

Keywords
User Study, Interactive Retrieval, Eye-Tracking

1. INTRODUCTION
Interactive retrieval systems are a commodity today, the
theoretic foundation for this type of systems is rather scarce.
The IPRP [3] is a probabilistic foundation for this kind of
system. However, there has been little work building upon
this framework. Although there have been many user studies
of search behaviour, none of them provides results that could
be used for improving the functional level of an IR system.
In this paper, we present a new methodology for analysing
interactive IR, extending current approaches by separating
between eye-tracking and action level, and by considering
dynamic areas of interest for the former. An example study
demonstrates the feasibility of our approach, yielding suggestions for system improvements as well as parameter estimates for the IPRP.
In the following, after giving a survey over related work,
we describe our test setting, and then analyse the experimental results, before we come to the conclusion.
The IPRP assumes that a user moves between situations
si , in each of which the system presents a list of choices,
about which the user has to decide, and the ﬁrst accepted
choice moves the user to a new situation. Each choice cij
is associated with three parameters: the eﬀort eij for considering this choice, the acceptance probability pij , and the
beneﬁt aij resulting from the acceptance. Below, we show
how the ﬁrst two parameters can be estimated in our setting,
while the third one still is an open research issue.
By applying economic theory to IIR Azzopardi modelled
the process of interaction between a user and a system and
constructed a cost function to measure the user eﬀort [1].

3.

RESULTS AND ANALYSIS

Our analysis is based on the combination of logging and
eye-tracking data. For the latter, as in other studies, we
focus on the so-called ﬁxations, and also consider them only
if they last for at least 80 ms, since this is the minimum time
required for reading anything on the screen [2].
Corresponding to the four areas of the user interface, we
can distinguish four types of user actions: formulating queries, looking at a result item, regarding document details, and
looking at the basket (which can be viewed as a more strategic action, where the user is thinking about the continuation
of her search). Thus, a one-to-one mapping of eye-tracking

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

1
AOILog is an open source software; it can be easily integrated into any user interface based on Java Swing.

1165

Query

15 %

4,9 sec

fort). Furthermore, we also see that click-through data
is a poor indicator of relevance.
4. As mentioned above, users often compare the current
document with entries from the basket. This could be
supported by a similarity search function, which show
the current document and similar one from the basket
side-by-side.
Now we analyse this data with regard to the IPRP. The
timings correspond to the eﬀort eij for evaluating a choice
cij , while the transition probabilities give the chances pij
of accepting it. As a possible approach for quantifying the
beneﬁt aij of a decision, we can regard the time needed
for ﬁnding the ﬁrst (next) relevant document. For that, we
compute the expected time for reaching the basket. Here we
can apply the method for computing “ﬁrst passage times” in
Markov networks, which leads to a linear equation system.
As results, we get 127.9 s for the query, 123.0 s for the result
list and 109.5 s for the details stage. The beneﬁts can then
be deﬁned as the time diﬀerences between the two situations
of a transition invoked by accepting a choice. As could be
expected, the biggest beneﬁts are achieved when moving to
the basket—but the corresponding acceptance probabilities
are low. On the other hand, there are also choices with
negative beneﬁts (when going back to query reformulation
or from detail to result). While the order of the beneﬁts
seems ok, negative beneﬁts are in contradiction to the IPRP,
which says that the corresponding choices are useless and
thus should be avoided. This is a more general problem of
parameter estimation for the IPRP: when reformulating the
query, users do not really go back to the initial situation,
they submit an improved query. For considering that, we
would need a more complex Markov model, and a much
larger number of observations.

Basket
1,7 sec

2%
24 %
100 %

3%

85 %
1%

Result
Item
2,3 sec

74 %

Detail
15,3 sec

9%
87 %

Figure 1: Transition probabilities and user eﬀorts

data and user actions seems to be straightforward. However,
a closer analysis showed that this is too simplistic.
First, we noted that users were frequently looking back
and forth between the details and the basket. The behaviour
was due to the fact that the book database often contains
very similar entries (e.g., diﬀerent editions of a book), thus
forcing users to check if the current result item was substantially diﬀerent from the books already placed in the basket.
Occasionally, this also happened for items in the result list.
In a similar way, when formulating a new query, users did
not only look at the query ﬁeld, but also checked the details
of the current document as well as the items in the basket.
In order to deal with these problems, we separate between
two levels, the eye-tracking level and the action level. Then
we deﬁne a mapping from the former to the latter, which
also considers the logging data. By default, the area the
user looks at deﬁnes the current action, with the following
exceptions:
• When the user looks from a result item to the basket
and back, without moving the item to the basket, this
is counted as part of regarding the item.
• The same holds for looking back and forth between
details and the basket.
• Query formulation starts when the user’s gaze wanders
from the details or the basket to the query ﬁeld for the
ﬁrst time, even when it returns to the basket/details
several times before the query is actually submitted.
Applying these rules resulted in the transition probabilities and average times spent for the diﬀerent actions displayed in Figure 1. From this data, a number of observations
can be made:
1. Query formulation is roughly the same time as looking
at two result items.
2. Retrieval quality is surprisingly low—only about 3 %
of the items in the result list are relevant. This is
mainly due to the complexity of the retrieval tasks.
3. Since only 24 % of the details regarded are judged as
relevant, the quality of the result entries could be improved, in order to increase this rate (while the probability of the transition from result to details would
decrease, thus leading to a reduction of the overall ef-

4. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we extended current methodologies for analyzing interactive IR by separating between eye-tracking and
action level, and by implementing dynamic areas of interest.
Our example study shows the ﬁndings point to possible system improvements, and that click-through rates are a poor
indicator of relevance. Finally, we can immediately derive
parameters for the IPRP, although open problems remain.

5. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported by the German Science Foundation under grant no. FU 205/24-1.

6.

REFERENCES

[1] L. Azzopardi. The economics in interactive information
retrieval. SIGIR ’11, pages 15–24, New York, NY, USA,
2011. ACM.
[2] G. Buscher, A. Dengel, and L. van Elst. Eye
movements as implicit relevance feedback. In CHI ’08,
pages 2991–2996, New York, NY, USA, 2008. ACM.
[3] N. Fuhr. A probability ranking principle for interactive
information retrieval. Information Retrieval,
11(3):251–265, 2008.
[4] Z. Guan and E. Cutrell. An eye tracking study of the
eﬀect of target rank on web search. In CHI ’07, pages
417–420, New York, NY, USA, 2007. ACM.
[5] T. Joachims, L. Granka, B. Pan, H. Hembrooke,
F. Radlinski, and G. Gay. Evaluating the accuracy of
implicit feedback from clicks and query reformulations
in web search. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., 25(2), 2007.

1166

