Methods for Mining and Summarizing Text Conversations
Giuseppe Carenini

Gabriel Murray

Department of Computer Science,
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, B.C., Canada
1(604) 822-5109

Department of Computing
and Information Systems
University of the Fraser Valley
Abbotsford, B.C., Canada

carenini@cs.ubc.ca

gabriel.murray@gmail.com
talks and university lectures. For instance, Dr. Murray was the
invited speaker at the summarization workshop at ACL 2011. Dr.
Carenini has recently presented work on mining conversations at
the AT&T Labs and at IBM Research.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
I.2 [Computing Methodologies]: Artificial Intelligence; I.7
[Computing Methodologies]: Document and Text Processing

Keywords

2.3 Course Objectives

Text Mining, Text Summarization, Text Conversations, Topic
Modeling, Opinion Mining, Email, (Micro)Blog, Discussion
Forums, Social Media,.

People attending this tutorial will learn about a set of
computational methods to extract information from conversational
data, and to provide natural language summaries of the data.

1. INTRODUCTION

(30 mins) The tutorial will start with an overview of basic
concepts by examining a simple written conversation. We will
clarify fundamental differences; for instance, between topic
segmentation and topic labelling and between extractive and
abstractive summaries.

More and more today, people are engaging in conversations via
email, blogs, discussion forums, text messaging and other social
media. A person may want to archive these conversations and
later retrieve information about what was discussed, or analyze a
conversation in real-time. What topics are covered in these
conversations? What opinions are people expressing? Have any
decisions been made? Have action items been assigned?
This tutorial will present various natural language processing
(NLP) techniques that can help answer these questions, thus
creating numerous new and valuable applications that can support
people in more effectively participating in these conversation.
The tutorial is based on a book that we have recently published,
Methods for Mining and Summarizing Text Conversations [1].

After this, students will learn about metrics for evaluating the
effectiveness of summarization and various extraction tasks. They
will also become familiar with some of the benchmark corpora
used in the literature.
(1 hour) In the second part of the tutorial student will learn about
extraction and mining methods for performing subjectivity and
sentiment detection, topic segmentation and modeling, and the
extraction of conversational structure. Our focus will be on
clarifying how methods developed for generic text can be
extended to work on conversational data, such as meeting
transcripts (which exemplify synchronous conversations) and
emails (which exemplify asynchronous conversations). Very
recent approaches to deal with blogs, discussion forums and
microblogs (e.g.,Twitter) will be also discussed by interactively
exploring several examples.

2. TUTORIAL DETAILS
2.1 Intended audience and prerequisites
This tutorial should be suitable for researchers who have a
background in Computer Science, Information Science or
Linguistics, but only minimal exposure to Natural Language
Processing. We assume the audience to be at least somewhat
familiar with basic probability and basic machine learning. If
most of the audience will lack such a background, we will be
ready to provide a quick and gentle introduction to the key ideas
and techniques.

(1 hour) In the third part of the tutorial, students will learn about
natural language summarization of conversational data. We will
initially provide a critical overview of several extractive and
abstractive summarizers developed for emails, meetings, blogs
and forums. Then, we will describe our own recent attempts for
building multi-modal summarizers.

2.2 Course Material
Our tutorial will be based on a book we have recently published:

(30 mins) At the end of the tutorial we will engage students
discussion on the future of the research on mining
summarizing conversations with a special focus on how
research can be informed by and be beneficial to research
applications in information retrieval.

[1] G. Carenini and G. Murray and R. Ng, Methods for Mining
and Summarizing Text Conversations, Morgan Claypool, 2011 –
The book is freely available online at subscribing institutions
(which include most universities and research labs). This is a new
tutorial, so we do not already have presentation material for it.
However, we have presented related material in several invited

in a
and
this
and

2.4 Course Relevance to Information
Retrieval
With the phenomenal growth in the amount of text conversations
stored in computer memory comes the need for supporting

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR'12, August 12-16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

1178

effective search. Generally speaking, the ability to mine and
summarize text can benefit any Web search. The more
information that can be extracted from text, the more search can
be based on the extracted information, rather than on simple
matching with the words in the query. For instance, the reader
may be very interested in browsing through all the sentences
expressing negative opinions, sentences that represent action
items, or sentences that describe decisions made.

4. TUTORIAL OUTLINE
(A) Introduction
1 The Internet Revolution and The Rise of Text Conversations
2 The Speech Technology Revolution
3 Application Scenarios
4 Mining and Summarizing Text Conversations: An Overview

Moreover, if any document can be effectively summarized, the
quality of the presentation of search query results can be
improved by presenting a summary as the snippet for each
returned documents. Arguably, these advantages would also apply
to a search engine for text conversations that relies on the
techniques presented in our tutorial. For instance, if it was
possible to extract topics and opinions from conversations, a
conversational search engine could support queries like: “what
messages in the company blogs express opinions on the new
budget?”. And the output of such search query could be a list of
relevant messages summarized in the context of both the query
and the conversation.

(B) Background: Corpora and Evaluation Methods
1 Corpora and Annotations (Meetings, Email, Blogs…)
2 Evaluation Metrics for Text Mining
3 Evaluation Metrics for Summarization
(C) MiningText Conversations
1 Topic Modeling of Conversations: Topic Segmentation and
Topic Labeling
2 Sentiment and Subjectivity Detection in Conversations

3. BRIEF BIOGRAPHY OF THE PRESENTERS

3 Extracting the Dialog Acts and the Conversational Structure

Dr. Giuseppe Carenini is an associate professor in computer
science at the University of British Columbia, UBC (BC,
Canada), with broad interdisciplinary interests. His work on
combining natural language processing and information
visualization to support decision making has been published in
over 70 peer-reviewed papers. Dr. Carenini was the area chair for
“Sentiment Analysis, Opinion Mining, and Text Classification” of
ACL 2009 and he is currently the area chair for “Summarization
and Generation” of NAACL 2012. He has recently co-edited an
ACM-TIST Special Issue on “Intelligent Visual Interfaces for
Text Analysis”. In July 2011, he has published a co-authored
book on “Methods for Mining and Summarizing Text
Conversations”. In his work, Dr. Carenini has also extensively
collaborated with industrial partners, including Microsoft and
IBM.

4 Detecting Decision and Action Items
(D) SummarizingText Conversations
1 Assumptions and Inputs, Measuring Informativeness, Outputs
and Interfaces
2 Summarizing Conversations in One Domain
3 Summarizing Emails / Meetings /Chats /Blogs
4 Summarizing Multi-Domain Conversations
5 Abstractive Conversation Summarization: A Detailed Case
Study
(E) Conclusions / FinalThoughts

Dr. Gabriel Murray has just recently joined as an assistant
professor the dept. of CS of the University of the Fraser Valley,
UFV, (BC, Canada). His background is in natural language
processing as well as theoretical linguistics. Dr. Murray has an
established research record in the area of automatic
summarization, with particular attention to summarization of
noisy genres such as speech and web data, and comparison of
abstractive and extractive techniques. He did his graduate studies
at the University of Edinburgh under Dr. Steve Renals, was a
member of the EU-funded AMI project on studying multimodal
interaction. Before joining UFV, Dr. Murray was a researcher at
UBC with the NSERC Business Intelligence Network on
intelligent data management and decision making. While at UBC,
he also gained substantial teaching experience. In July 2011, Dr.
Murray has published a co-authored book on “Methods for
Mining and Summarizing Text Conversations”.

1 Future trends in research on mining and summarizing
conversations
2 How this research can be informed by and be beneficial to
research and applications in information retrieval?

5. REFERENCES
[1] G. Carenini and G. Murray and R. Ng, Methods for Mining
and Summarizing Text Conversations, Morgan Claypool, 2011 –
Available online: http://www.morganclaypool.com/toc/dtm/1/1

1179

