Want a Coffee? Predicting Users’ Trails
Wen Li

Carsten Eickhoff

Arjen P. de Vries

Delft University of Technology
Delft, Netherlands

Delft University of Technology
Delft, Netherlands

CWI
Amsterdam, Netherlands

wen.li@tudelft.nl

c.eickhoff@tudelft.nl

ABSTRACT
Twitter and Foursquare are two well-connected platforms
for sharing information where growing numbers of users post
location-related messages. In contrast to the longitude-latitude
geotags commonly used online, e.g., on photos and tweets,
new place-tags containing category information show more
human-readable high-level information rather than a pair of
coordinates. This grants an opportunity for better understanding users’ physical locations which can be used as context to facilitate other applications, e.g., location contextaware advertisement. In this paper, we verify the assumption that users’ current trails contain cues of their future
routes. The results from the preliminary experiments show
promising performance of a basic Markov Chain-based model.
Categories: H.2.8 [Database Management] Database applications - Data mining J.4 [Computer Application] Social
and Behavioral Science
General Terms: Experimentation
Keywords: Twitter, location-based estimation, text mining, geotagging, mobile applications

1.

INTRODUCTION

Twitter is a platform for sharing various kinds of information, such as photos, videos and even users’ geo-locations.
This is going far beyond what the service was designed for;
sending text messages of 140 characters. Originally, user
messages, so-called tweets, only contained a pair of geocoordinates to indicate the location where the user issued
his/her tweet. This hardly provides any information about
the environment around users at the time of posting. Last
year, Twitter extended its API to supporting Places of Interest (POI) to facilitate users tagging their tweets with more
accurate high-level geo information. This novel kind of geotags provides several properties such as names, boundingboxes, and information about geographically-related entities, giving easy access to the functional aspect of locations.
Foursquare is a dedicated geo-location sharing platform.
Users are encouraged to check-in at a POI, that is, to post

arjen@acm.org

a message on both Twitter and Foursquare, declaring their
visit, upon which they are rewarded with badges, coupons,
etc. The service’s API provides rich information, such as
POI categories and URLs to homepages. This kind of information enables making connections between users, locations and their potential activities. The place level geoinformation arising in Twitter and Foursquare facilitates our
research on predicting users’ likelihoods of visiting a place
based on their current and previous visits. With this kind
of knowledge, advertisers could display targeted information more accurately to earn more attention and clicks. For
example, having known a user would go for a coffee after
work, a suggestion of an attractive lately-opened café would
be more persuasive before he/she already visited one.
Recently, there were many discoveries in the domain of
location-related social information. Backstrom et al. [1]
studied the vocabulary gap between users in different areas in the US and proposed a method based on local word
filtering to estimate users’ hometowns. Kurashima et al. [2]
proposed a method of integrating Markov Chains and Topic
Models to recommend travel routes based on geo-tagged
photos shared online. Sadilek et al. [3] studied the relation between friendships and location visiting patterns and
proposed a friend recommendation method. These studies
on location-aware applications show an interesting connection between a user’s location and his/her characteristics in
other aspects.
In this paper, we formalize our task as, given a user’s history of visits in a trail, how can we estimate the types of
POI in the future part of trail? Here, a trail is defined as
a sequence of POIs a user visits during one day. We experimentally validate whether we can predict user behavior
represented by the POI type of their next visit based on data
from Twitter and Foursquare using a Markov Chain-based
model. The method can also be easily integrated into applications on mobile devices which may facilitate a location
recommendation or context-aware advertising.

2. DATA
The data were collected via Twitter’s API following a
strategy of tracking active users of POI-tagged tweets and
the places popular among those users. After 6 months of
consecutive crawling, we hold a corpus of 1 277 596 tweets
tagged with 236 369 unique POIs. In Figure 1, we can
see that the distribution of tweets over POIs approximate
a power law distribution and around 90% of POIs are observed less than 10 times.
Twitter has no hierarchic POI categorization in terms of

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

1171

# of Tweets

10

10

10

10

10

4

3

NY
CH
LA
SF
US

2

1

0

10

0

10

1

10

2

10

3

10

4

10

5

10

6

Table 1: Evaluation in MRR
Frequency
Subcategory
Category
Tweets Trails
MC
BL
MC
BL
22307
5471 0.400 0.334 0.661 0.618
8313
1835 0.545 0.474 0.750 0.709
9641
2315 0.794 0.777 0.888 0.871
7399
2315 0.591 0.536 0.779 0.733
130298 26135 0.469 0.420 0.710 0.668

POI

the data, there are few trails in the test set, e.g., within
San Francisco, there are only 200 trails composed of 800
POI-tagged tweets for test. According to the assumption
of dependency in the model, we test the method for each
consecutive POI pair in each trail. For example, we test
(Desserts, Apparel), (Apparel, Record Shop), (Record Shop,
Toys&Games) for the trail (Desserts, Apparel, Record Shop,
Toys&Games). Due to the setting, there is only one true
positive in each result list. Accuracy-based measurements
would fail distinguishing differences between two rankings
having the reference ranked higher than the cut-off. Therefore, Mean reciprocal rank (MRR) is used for evaluation.
The results of our experiments are listed in Table 1 and the
significance of our results is tested by a Wilcoxon signed
rank test (α < 0.002).
From Table 1, we can see our trail-causality-based model
(MC) outperforming the baseline (BL) significantly in all
experiments. On the other hand, the performance of the
baseline suggests that there is a strong tendency that users
stay at the same POI type for many consecutive postings.
By manually checking against the data, we find that there
are numerous trails composed of chat with friends posted
coherently in both time and space dimensions, i.e., a short
burst of tweets from one place. For example, we find one
user with two trails full of tweets coming from a single place.
The content of those tweets are replies to her friends’ tweets.
This observation suggests a more thorough study on the time
dimension of trails which is left for our future work.

Figure 1: Tweet Distribution over POIs

functionality; Foursquare, on the other hand, does not provide adequate API for crawling data, but offers POI categories organized in a 3-level hierarchy with 9 categories at
the top level, such as food, nightlife, shops and 391 subcategories at lower levels, such as American food, bars, apparels. This would enable us to analyze user behavior on
different levels of granularity. As no public API exists to
map places between the two services, we have to bridge the
data from Twitter and Foursquare by using Foursquare’s
venue search API. This API accepts a query and a pair
of coordinates and returns a list of matching places. By
carefully mapping places from both sides, we obtain category information (i.e., POI types) for about 85% of the
POIs. By grouping tweets into trails as defined in Section
1, and filtering out those trails shorter than 5 visits, we
finally have 17 738 trails forming our ground truth. The
average length of those trails in terms of visits and places
are respectively 7.345 and 5.096. To enable reproduction
of our results, we make our anonymous dataset available at
http://homepage.tudelft.nl/9y54n

3.

METHODS AND EXPERIMENTS

Similarly to the work in [2], we assume users’ next steps
to depend on their current and past locations. Let a trail
be a sequence of random variables Xt indicating the categories of POIs, and then simplifying the assumption, we have
P (Xt |Xt−1 , Xt−2 , . . . , X0 ) = P (Xt |Xt−1 ). This fits the definition of Markov Chains. We use them in this exploratory
study to verify our assumption of causal dependencies between trail elements. As a baseline, we assume users to stay
at their current location type. This is inspired by the observation that users tend to post several times from a single
place and its performance is significantly better than random guessing.
The experiments are conducted at two levels of granularity of categories provided by the hierarchy from Foursquare,
i.e., the top level categories and sub-level categories. Under both levels of granularity, we repeat the experiment on
tweets with POIs located in 4 major US cities, namely, New
York (NY), Chicago (CH), Los Angeles (LA) and San Francisco (SF) as well as the whole country, in order to check
whether users from the same areas have locally coherent
visiting patterns.
The data set in each experiment is split according to 10fold cross validation. Moreover, our split is based on users,
i.e., there is no overlap between training set and testing set
in terms of users, which will prevent the methods from overfitting users who have more trails. Due to the sparsity in

4. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We have shown, in our preliminary research, the viability of using Markov Chains to estimate users’ next visits in
terms of place types based on POI-tagged tweets. By matching places in Twitter and Foursquare, we augment the place
information with category information which we would like
to share. In the future, we would like to exploit additional
sources of evidence such as time of posting or notions of personal preference to further support user tasks that depend
on spatial context.

5. REFERENCES
[1] L. Backstrom, E. Sun, and C. Marlow. Find me if you
can: improving geographical prediction with social and
spatial proximity. In WWW ’10, pages 61–70, 2010.
[2] T. Kurashima, T. Iwata, G. Irie, and K. Fujimura.
Travel route recommendation using geotags in photo
sharing sites. In CIKM ’10, pages 579–588, 2010.
[3] A. Sadilek, H. Kautz, and J. P. Bigham. Finding Your
Friends and Following Them to Where You Are
Categories and Subject Descriptors. In WSDM ’12,
pages 723–732, 2012.

1172

