Will This #Hashtag Be Popular Tomorrow?

∗

Zongyang Ma
zma4@e.ntu.edu.sg

Aixin Sun
axsun@ntu.edu.sg

Gao Cong
gaocong@ntu.edu.sg

School of Computer Engineering
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, 639798

ABSTRACT

Categories and Subject Descriptors

who adopt a hashtag; these context features are not used in [3]. Second, our content features are derived from the content of the tweets
annotated by a hashtag whereas almost all content features in [3]
are derived from the hashtag itself (e.g., number of characters in a
hashtag). Third, we target on time critical applications to predict
hashtag popularity on daily basis rather than weekly basis, because
most bursty hashtags are popular for a few days only [1].
To the best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to predict hashtag
popularity in daily basis, using both content and context features.
Additionally, we are the ﬁrst to utilize clarity and topic modeling
as content features for hashtag analysis.

H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search
and Retrieval—Information ﬁltering

2.

Keywords

Problem Deﬁnition. In our problem setting, all tweets received
from a Twitter stream are partitioned into consecutive ﬁxed timeintervals by their time-stamps. The time-interval could be an hour,
a few hours, or a day, depending on the number of tweets received
as well as the time criticalness of the prediction. We deﬁne the
popularity degree of a hashtag h in time-interval t, denoted by Φth ,
to be the number of users who post at least one tweet annotated by
h within time-interval t. Given the collection of tweets published
h
.
in t and a hashtag h of interest, our task is to predict Φt+1
h
is extremely hard
Note that predicting the exact value of Φt+1
and is often not necessary. Therefore we relax the problem and
predict the range of popularity degree. We deﬁne 5 ranges: [0, φ ),
[φ , 2φ ), [2φ , 4φ ), [4φ , 8φ ), and [8φ , +∞), representing not popular, marginally popular, popular, very popular, and extremely popular, respectively. Note that the ranges are deﬁned following an
exponential order and φ is application-dependent.
Let Tt h be the collection of tweets annotated by hashtag h in timeinterval t. Tt h is also known as hashtag proﬁle. Next, we detail the
content and context features extracted from a hashtag proﬁle.
Content Features. The 6 content features extracted from Tt h are
listed in Table 1. We elaborate hashtag clarity and hashtag topic
vector features in more detail. Hashtag clarity quantiﬁes topical
cohesiveness of all tweets in Tt h . It is computed as the KullbackLeibler (KL) divergence between the uni-gram language model inferred from Tt h and the background language model from the entire
tweet collection T . If a hashtag refers to a speciﬁc topic, then
the high probabilities of a few topic-relevant words distinguish its
tweets from the background.

Hashtags are widely used in Twitter to deﬁne a shared context for
events or topics. In this paper, we aim to predict hashtag popularity
in near future (i.e., next day). Given a hashtag that has the potential to be popular in the next day, we construct a hashtag proﬁle
using the tweets containing the hashtag, and extract both content
and context features for hashtag popularity prediction. We model
this prediction problem as a classiﬁcation problem and evaluate the
eﬀectiveness of the extracted features and classiﬁcation models.

Twitter, Hashtag, Popularity prediction, Hashtag clarity

1.

INTRODUCTION

Micro-blogging services represented by Twitter are changing our
way of accessing and disseminating information online. Because
of the fast information disseminating rate, various topics emerge
within a very short time period, particularly some public relations
crises. This calls for eﬀective prediction on what topics would
emerge into signiﬁcant ones in near future. As an important feature in Twitter, hastags (keywords preﬁxed with # symbols) are
widely used to deﬁne a shared context for speciﬁc events, topics,
or meme [1]. We therefore propose to predict hashtag popularity in
near future, which could identify topics/events that might be critical
for relevant organizations to response earlier.
Hashtag has attracted signiﬁcant research interest. In [2], the authors analyze hashtags in eight categories (e.g., politics, celebrity)
for the diﬀerences in the mechanics of information diﬀusion. The
evolution of hashtag popularity over time (e.g., usage patterns before and after bursty peaks) is analyzed in [1]. Diﬀerent from both
studies which perform retrospective analysis of hashtags using historical data, we aim to predict hashtag popularity for newly appearing hashtags in a Twitter stream in the next day.
Most germane to this work is the recent paper on predicting hashtag popularity in weekly basis [3]. Our work is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent. First, we predict the number of users who adopt a hashtag, but
not the number of tweets annotated by the hashtag in [3]. We therefore derive 8 features from the virtual community formed by users
∗

HASHTAG POPULARITY PREDICTION

Clarity(Tt h ) =

This work was partially supported by Singapore’s National Research Foundation’s
research grant NRF2008IDM-IDM004-036, and Singapore MOE AcRF Tier-1 Grant
RG13/10.


w∈Tth

P(w|Tt h )log2

P(w|Tt h )
P(w|T )

Hashtags in a similar topic (e.g., political, music) may follow
similar popularity trends [1]. We use Latent Dirichlet Allocation
(LDA) to identify the topic distribution of a hashtag. Each hashtag
proﬁle Tt h is considered as a document and 20 topics are inferred

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

1173

Number of popular hashtags

4096

Table 1: The 6 content features and 8 context features
Type
Content
Feature

Context
Feature

Description
(1) number of tweets in Tth , (2) fraction of tweets containing URL, (3) fraction of re-tweet, (4) fraction of tweets with
mention "@", (5) hashtag clarity, and (6) 20-dimension hashtag topic vector.
(1) number of users |Uth |, (2) average authority of users, (3)
density of Gth , (4) fraction of users forming triangles in Gth ,
(5) ratio between the number of connected components and
the number of nodes in Gth , (6) average edge weights in Gth ,
(7) number of border users, and (8) 15-dimension exposure
probability vector.

256
64
16
4
1
1

2

4

8

16

Popular duration (Number of days)

(a) Popular tag vs popular duration

32

Popularity
[0, 25)
[25, 50)
[50, 100)
[100, 200)
200
Total

No. hashtags
1609
614
353
211
111
2898

(b) Hashtag distribution

Figure 1: Popular tag vs duration; and distribution of instances
Table 2: Hashtag popularity prediction accuracy by 8 methods
Method
Random
Lazy
PriorDist
NB
KNN
C4.5
SVM
MaxEnt

from all such documents in our data. A 20-dimension topic vector
is then assigned to each hashtag proﬁle with the entries quantifying
the likelihood of the hashtag belonging to the corresponding topic.
Context Features. We ﬁrst construct a directed weighted graph
G = U, E to model user relations in the data collection. In G, a
user u ∈ U is a node and a directed edge e(u p , uq ) ∈ E from u p to uq
is weighted by the number of times u p mentions uq in her tweets,
similar to that in [2]. The authority scores of users are computed in
this global user graph using PageRank algorithm.
We consider all users who post at least one tweet in hashtag proﬁle Tt h form a virtual community. By extracting their relations from
the global user graph, we form a community graph Gth = Uth , Eth .
From Gth , 8 context features (see Table 1) are derived to capture
the current popularity of h, the inﬂuential power of its users, the
connectivity among these users, and the distribution of the users
exposed to h. We elaborate the last two features in Table 1.
Based on the global graph, border users are those each has at
least one edge from users in Gth but has not adopted hashtag h,
i.e., {uq |∃e(u p , uq ), u p ∈ Uth , uq  Uth }. Exposure probability vector
depicts border user distribution in a more detailed manner: P(k)
(1 ≤ k ≤ 15) is the ratio of border users who have k edges from
users in Gth . A border user with more exposure to a hashtag is
expected to be more likely to adopt the hashtag.

3.

1024

Micro-F1
0.197
0.254
0.385
0.397
0.500
0.527
0.582
0.591

Macro-Pr
0.198
0.251
0.209
0.341
0.426
0.413
0.401
0.437

Macro-Re
0.205
0.450
0.210
0.390
0.419
0.408
0.329
0.387

Macro-F1
0.163
0.317
0.209
0.338
0.422
0.409
0.296
0.382

The baseline methods are Random (predicts the popularity range
h
h
randomly), Lazy (predicts the range of Φt+1
the same as
of Φt+1
h
randomly following
Φth ), and PriorDist (predicts the range of Φt+1
a prior probability distribution in the 5 ranges).
Results. We conducted 10-fold cross validation and evaluated prediction accuracy using Micro-F1 , Macro-Precision, Macro-Recall
and Macro-F1 . Note that, because each instance has exactly one
correct label, Micro-Precision/Recall is the same as Micro-F1 .
Table 2 reports the prediction accuracies by the 8 methods, in
increasing order of Micro-F1 . All baseline methods perform the
worst. Observe that MaxEnt achieves the best Micro-F1 of 0.591
which is triple of Random and 54% of increment over the best
baseline PriorDist. SVM is the second best performing method
by Micro-F1 ; MaxEnt also achieves the best Macro-Pr followed by
KNN. Surprisingly, Lazy prediction yields the best Macro-Re. The
main reason is the skewed distribution of our categories (see Figure 1(b)). Because of the small number of instances in very popular
and extremely popular ranges, most classiﬁers fail to learn eﬀective
patterns for accurate prediction. Lazy prediction enjoys high accuracy mainly in these two ranges. By Macro-F1 KNN is the best
performing method.
Our analysis on features reveals that context features are relatively more eﬀective than content features (detailed results not reported due to page limit). The top-5 most eﬀective features are: (1)
number of users, (2) number of border users, (3) number of tweets,
(4) hashtag clarity, and (5) fraction of users forming triangles.

EXPERIMENTS

Experimental Setting. We used tweets published by Singaporebased users from Jan to Aug 2011. The dataset consists of more
than 31M tweets from over 2M users. The global user graph constructed based on mention relation consists of 214K users and 680K
edges. Note that, only users participated in mentions are included
in this graph. In our experiments, we set the time-interval to be a
day and set φ = 25. That is, a hashtag used by fewer than 25 users
in a day is considered not popular.
A key issue in the experiments is that, among all hashtags appeared at least once in a day, which hastags should be selected for
popularity prediction. Figure 1(a) plots the number of popular tags
(Φth ≥ φ ) against their popularity duration in number of days. Observe that a large number of tags are popular for only a day. In
fact, a much larger number of tags has never been popular. In our
experiments, we therefore choose to predict the popularity degree
of newly appearing hashtags that are at least marginally popular,
Φth ≥ φ . A hashtag is considered new if it has not gained marginal
popularity in the past 7 days. Note that, the same hashtag may
gain popularity in diﬀerent time periods for diﬀerent reasons. For
example, #apple may gain popularity at diﬀerent time periods for
releasing diﬀerent products.
We conducted experiments using ﬁve commonly used classiﬁcation methods: Naïve Bayes (NB), Decision Tree (C4.5), k-Nearest
Neighbor (KNN), Support Vector Machine (SVM) and Maximum
Entropy (MaxEnt). Their prediction accuracies are compared with
three baseline methods, which do not use any extracted features.

4.

SUMMARY

In this paper, we propose to predict hashtag popularity to identify
fast emerging topics attracting collective attention. Our preliminary
results demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of both content and context
features. In our future work, we will continue to investigate other
possible features, and more importantly to investigate eﬀective prediction models speciﬁcally for hashtag popularity prediction.

5.

REFERENCES

[1] J. Lehmann, B. Gonçalves, J. J. Ramasco, and C. Cattuto. Dynamical
classes of collective attention in twitter. In WWW, pages 251–260,
2012.
[2] D. M. Romero, B. Meeder, and J. M. Kleinberg. Diﬀerences in the
mechanics of information diﬀusion across topics: idioms, political
hashtags, and complex contagion on twitter. In WWW, 2011.
[3] O. Tsur and A. Rappoport. What’s in a hashtag?: content based
prediction of the spread of ideas in microblogging communities. In
WSDM, pages 643–652, 2012.

1174

