Aspect-based Opinion Mining from Product Reviews
Samaneh Moghaddam

Martin Ester

School of Computing Science
Simon Fraser University
Burnaby, BC, Canada

School of Computing Science
Simon Fraser University
Burnaby, BC, Canada

sam39@cs.sfu.ca

ester@cs.sfu.ca

ABSTRACT

1.

“What other people think” has always been an important
piece of information for most of us during the decisionmaking process. Today people tend to make their opinions available to other people via the Internet. As a result, the Web has become an excellent source of consumer
opinions. There are now numerous Web resources containing such opinions, e.g., product reviews forums, discussion
groups, and blogs. But, it is really diﬃcult for a customer
to read all of the reviews and make an informed decision on
whether to purchase the product. It is also diﬃcult for the
manufacturer of the product to keep track and manage customer opinions. Also, focusing on just user ratings (stars) is
not a suﬃcient source of information for a user or the manufacturer to make decisions. Therefore, mining online reviews
(opinion mining) has emerged as an interesting new research
direction. Extracting aspects and the corresponding ratings
is an important challenge in opinion mining. An aspect is
an attribute or component of a product, e.g. ‘zoom’ for a
digital camera. A rating is an intended interpretation of the
user satisfaction in terms of numerical values. Reviewers
usually express the rating of an aspect by a set of sentiments, e.g. ‘great zoom’. In this tutorial we cover opinion
mining in online product reviews with the focus on aspectbased opinion mining. This problem is a key task in the area
of opinion mining and has attracted a lot of researchers in
the information retrieval community recently. Several opinion related information retrieval tasks can beneﬁt from the
results of aspect-based opinion mining and therefore it is
considered as a fundamental problem. This tutorial covers
not only general opinion mining and retrieval tasks, but also
state-of-the-art methods, challenges, applications, and also
future research directions of aspect-based opinion mining.

Categories and Subject Descriptors

Samaneh Moghaddam is a PhD candidate in the school
of computer science at Simon Fraser University. Her main
research interests include information retrieval, text mining, machine learning, natural language processing, and social network analysis. Samaneh is a senior member of SFU
Database and Data mining lab under supervision of Dr.
Martin Ester. Her PhD thesis is ”Aspect-based Opinion
Mining from Online Product Reviews”. She has proposed
some novel techniques for extracting product aspects and
estimating their ratings from product reviews. Samaneh
Moghaddam has published several papers in top international conferences such as ACM CIKM, ACM SIGIR, and
IEEE ICDM. Her publications are mostly related to her research on information retrieval and machine learning models
for mining opinion from product reviews.
Martin Ester received a PhD in Computer Science from
ETH Zurich, Switzerland, in 1990 with a thesis on knowledgebased systems and logic programming. He has been working
for Swissair developing expert systems before he joined University of Munich as an Assistant Professor in 1993. Since
November 2001, he has been an Associate Professor, now
Full Professor at the School of Computing Science of Simon Fraser University, where he co-directs the Database
and Data mining research lab. He has published extensively in the top conferences and journals of his ﬁeld such
as ACM SIGKDD, VLDB, ICDM and ICDE, and his work
has been very well-cited. His most famous paper on DBSCAN received more than 2900 citations, and his H-number
is 34. His current research interests include social network
analysis, recommender systems, opinion mining, biological
network analysis and high-throughput sequence data analysis. Martin Ester’s interests in applications have resulted
in various collaborations with research labs, industry and
government agencies.

PRESENTERS’ BIOS

H.3.0 [Information Search and Retrieval]: General; I.2.7
[Natural Language Processing]: Text Analysis

2.

TARGET AUDIENCE

The tutorial will draw information retrieval researchers
and students who want to make themselves familiar with
opinion mining as well as practitioners who want to develop
state-of-the-art methods for diﬀerent tasks of opinion mining. We expect participants to have a working knowledge
of basic information retrieval and machine learning methods. Basic natural language processing techniques used in
opinion mining will be discussed during the tutorial.

General Terms
Algorithms, Performance, Experimentation

Keywords
sentiment analysis, opinion mining, aspect-based opinion
mining, aspect identiﬁcation, rating prediction
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

1184

