Visual Information Retrieval using Java and LIRE
Mathias Lux

Oge Marques

Florida Atlantic University
777 Glades Road
Boca Raton, FL 33431

Klagenfurt University
Universitätsstrasse 65-67
Klagenfurt, Austria

omarques@fau.edu

mlux@itec.uni-klu.ac.at

ABSTRACT

Visual information retrieval (VIR) is an active and vibrant
research area, which attempts at providing means for organizing,
indexing, annotating, and retrieving visual information (images
and videos) form large, unstructured repositories. The goal of
VIR is to retrieve the highest number of relevant matches to a
given query (often expressed as an example image and/or a series
of keywords). In its early years (1995-2000) the research efforts
were dominated by content-based approaches contributed
primarily by the image and video processing community. During
the past decade, it was widely recognized that the challenges
imposed by the semantic gap (the lack of coincidence between an
image’s visual contents and its semantic interpretation) required a
clever use of textual metadata (in addition to information
extracted from the image’s pixel contents) to make image and
video retrieval solutions efficient and effective. The need to
bridge (or at least narrow) the semantic gap has been one of the
driving forces behind current VIR research. Additionally, other
related research problems and market opportunities have started to
emerge, offering a broad range of exciting problems for computer
scientists and engineers to work on.

The tutorial is primarily targeted at experienced Information
Retrieval researchers and practitioners interested in extending
their knowledge of document-based IR to equivalent concepts,
techniques, and challenges in VIR. The acquired knowledge
should allow participants to derive insightful conclusions and
promising avenues for further investigation.

Categories and Subject Descriptors

H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]

General Terms

Algorithms.

Keywords

Content-Based Image Retrieval, Visual Information Retrieval,
Image Search, Java.

Bios

Oge Marques is Associate Professor in the Dept of Computer and
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science at Florida Atlantic
University. He has more than 20 years of teaching and research
experience in the fields of image processing and computer vision.
He is the (co-) author of five books in these topics, including
"Content-Based Image and Video Retrieval" (with Borko Furht)
(Springer, 2002), the recently published textbook “Practical Image
and Video Processing Using MATLAB” (Wiley, 2011), and the
upcoming book “Visual Information Retrieval using Java and
LIRE” (with Mathias Lux). He has also published several book
chapters and more than 50 refereed journal and conference papers
in these fields. He serves as a reviewer and Editorial Board
member for several leading journals in computer science and
engineering. He is a senior member of both the ACM and the
IEEE.

In this tutorial, we present an overview of visual information
retrieval (VIR) concepts, techniques, algorithms, and applications.
Several topics are supported by examples written in Java, using
Lucene (an open-source Java-based indexing and search
implementation) and LIRE (Lucene Image REtrieval), an opensource Java-based library for content-based image retrieval
(CBIR) written by Mathias Lux.
After motivating the topic, we briefly review the fundamentals of
information retrieval, present the most relevant and effective
visual descriptors currently used in VIR, the most common
indexing approaches for visual descriptors, the most prominent
machine learning techniques used in connection with
contemporary VIR solutions, as well as the challenges associated
with building real-world, large scale VIR solutions, including a
brief overview of publicly available datasets used in worldwide
challenges, contests, and benchmarks. Throughout the tutorial, we
integrate examples using LIRE, whose main features and design
principles are also discussed. Finally, we conclude the tutorial
with suggestions for deepening the knowledge in the topic,
including a brief discussion of the most relevant advances, open
challenges, and promising opportunities in VIR and related areas.

Mathias Lux studied Mathematics at Graz University of
Technology. After finishing his Master's studies in 2004, he
started his PhD studies in multimedia retrieval based on semantic
metadata, also in Graz, which he finished in 2006 with distinction.
From 1998 to 2001 he worked in industry in the area of webbased applications, before being employed as a researcher at the
Know-Center, a competence center for knowledge- based
applications in Graz, focusing on information retrieval. From
2004 to 2006 he worked at the Knowledge Management Institute
(KMI) of Graz University of Technology as a university assistant.
He is currently working on multimedia retrieval based on
metadata and emergent semantics in social computing.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

1193

