Collaborative Information Seeking – Art and Science
of Achieving 1+1>2 in IR
Chirag Shah
School of Communication & Information (SC&I)
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey
4 Huntington St, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA

chirags@rutgers.edu
to those for CIS. This will be achieved through introduction to
appropriate literature, algorithms and interfaces that facilitate CIS,
and methodologies for studying and evaluating them. Thus, the
course will offer a balance between theoretical and practical
elements of CIS.

ABSTRACT
The assumption of information seekers being independent and IR
problem being individual has been challenged often in the recent
past, with an argument that the next big leap in search and retrieval
will come through incorporating social and collaborative aspects of
information seeking. This half-day tutorial will introduce the student
to theories, methodologies, and tools that focus on information
retrieval/seeking in collaboration. The student will have an
opportunity to learn about the social aspect of IR with a focus on
collaborative information seeking (CIS) situations, systems, and
evaluation techniques. The course is intended for those interested in
social and collaborative aspects of IR (from both academia and
industry), and requires only a general understanding of IR systems
and evaluation.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3: INFORMATION STORAGE AND RETRIEVAL H.3.3:
Information Search and Retrieval: Search process; H.5.3
[Information Interfaces and Presentation]: Group and
Organization Interfaces—Collaborative computing, Computersupported cooperative work; Theory and models.

Figure 1: Depiction of CIS and related topics using the
dimensions of human-system and explicit-implicit collaboration.

2. COURSE OBJECTIVES

Keywords

The course will have the following broad objectives:

Collaborative information seeking (CIS); Tutorial.

1. OVERVIEW AND RATIONALE
Traditionally, IR is considered an individual pursuit, and not
surprisingly, the majority of tools, techniques, and models
developed for addressing information need, retrieval, and usage
have focused on single users. The assumption of information
seekers being independent and IR problem being individual has
been challenged often in the recent past (e.g., [2,5,12]. This course
will introduce such works to the students, with an emphasis on
understanding models and systems that support collaborative search
or browsing. To put CIS in perspective, the course will show the
students how various related concepts, such as collaborative
information behavior (CIB), co-browsing, co-search, collaborative
filtering, can be placed on the dimensions of human-system and
explicitness-implicitness along with CIS and CIR (Figure 1) for
exploration and developmental needs, as well as evaluation
purposes.

1.

Define collaborative information seeking (CIS) and
differentiate it with related terms.

2.

Identify situations and motivations for CIS.

3.

List various dimensions of collaborative
work/systems/method.

4.

Discuss system-mediated and user-mediated CIS with
examples.

5.

Enumerate essential and desired features of CIS systems.

6.

Outline an evaluation framework for CIS.

3. RELEVANCE TO THE IR COMMUNITY
With an increasing number of researchers from the fields of IR,
HCI, and social media coming together, there has been an
unprecedented interest to CIS/CIR and related issues in the recent
years. While the concept of people working together in solving IR
problems has been explored before, it has made its strong comeback
in the past few years. This area has gained significant momentum
through a number of workshops and other professional events, as
well as special issues of journals. And yet, we have just scratched
the surface. With the advent of social media and collaboratively
generated content (CGC) everywhere, it is time the IR community
takes a serious look at this topic that is increasingly achieving more
relevance and importance. With its applicability to numerous
domains including education, legal, health, and business, studying

Specifically, the course will (1) outline the research and latest
developments in the field of collaborative IR, (2) list the challenges
for designing and evaluating collaborative IR systems, and (3) show
how traditional single user IR models and systems could be mapped
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

1198

(http://www.coagmento.org/), which allows a group of users to
search and share information in collaboration. He recently received
the Yahoo! Campus Innovation Award for his project titled
“Reimagining and Reinvigorating Information Seeking with a Novel
Approach to Collaborative Information Seeking”. He also taught a
short course on collaborative IR at the Russian Summer School of
Information Retrieval (RuSSIR) in St Petersburg in Summer 2011,
and a tutorial on CIS at WSDM 2012. His book on Collaborative
Information Seeking is being published by Springer [11].

various issues relating to CIS/CIR is very timely and relevant to the
IR community.

4. OUTLINE OF THE TUTORIAL
The three-hour course will follow a general structure given below.


Hour-1: Discuss situations for CIS; Introduce a few groupbased information seeking models and systems (e.g., Grudin’s
work [4]); Learn about the taxonomy for CIS systems and
situations (e.g., [3,8]) and see how existing systems fit into this
structure.



Hour-2: Discuss the back-end of CIS systems; Look at the
works by Pickens et al. [7] and Shah et al. [9] that focus on
algorithmic mediation; Discuss the front-end of collaborative
IR systems; Look at the works by Twidale et al. [12] and
Morris and Horvitz [6] that focus on interface-based mediation.



7. REFERENCES
[1] Baeza-Yates, R., & Pino, J. A. (1997). A First Step to Formally
Evaluate Collaborative Work. Proceedings of GROUP (pp. 5660).
[2] Fidel, R., Bruce, H., Pejtersen, A. M., Dumais, S. T., Grudin,
J., & Poltrock, S. (2000). Collaborative Information Retrieval
(CIR). The New Review of Information Behaviour Research,
235-247.

Hour-3: Learn about existing approaches to data mining and
evaluation for CIS systems (e.g., [1]); See how system-based
and user-based measurements could be used for a more holistic
analysis (e.g., [10]).

[3] Golovchinsky, G., Pickens, J., & Back, M. (2008). A
taxonomy of collaboration in online information seeking.
Proceedings of JCDL 2008 Workshop on Collaborative
Exploratory Search. Pittsburgh, PA.

5. COURSE MATERIALS
Course materials will be made available on a Web site hosted under
http://collab.infoseeking.org/ two weeks prior to the tutorial. They
will include links to relevant software; links to publications that will
be discussed; and mechanisms for communication (Twitter hashtags
#cis2012 and #sigir2012, blog space, etc.) among the tutorial
participants, before, during and after the tutorial.

[4] Grudin, J. (1994). Groupware and social dynamics: eight
challenges for developers. Communications of the ACM, 37(1),
92-105.
[5] Hansen, P., & Jarvelin, K. (2005). Collaborative Information
Retrieval in an information-intensive domain. Information
Processing and Management, 41, 1101-1119.

Since this course is focused on introducing several relevant theories,
models, approaches, and findings in the field of CIS/CIR, the
participants will also be given an annotated bibliography that
represents seminal works in this area.

[6] Morris, M. R., & Horvitz, E. (2007). SearchTogether: An
Interface for Collaborative Web Search. ACM Symposium on
User Interface Software and Technology (UIST) (pp. 3-12).
Newport, RI.

6. ABOUT THE PRESENTER

[7] Pickens, J., Golovchinsky, G., Shah, C., Qvarfordt, P., & Back,
M. (2008). Algorithmic Mediation for Collaborative
Exploratory Search. Proceedings of the Annual ACM
Conference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval (SIGIR). Singapore.

Chirag Shah is an assistant professor at the Dept. of Library &
Information Science (LIS) within the School of Communication &
Information (SC&I) at Rutgers University, USA. He received his
PhD from the School of Information & Library Science (SILS) at
UNC Chapel Hill (advisor: Gary Marchionini). He holds an MTech,
Computer Science & Engineering from IIT Madras, India and an
MS, Computer Science from UMass Amherst (advisor: W. Bruce
Croft).

[8] Rodden, T. (1991). A Survey of CSCW Systems. Interacting
with Computers, 3(3), 319-353.
[9] Shah, C., Pickens, J., & Golovchinsky, G. (2010). Role-based
results redistribution for collaborative information retrieval.
Information Processing & Management, 46(6), 773-781.
doi:10.1016/j.ipm.2009.10.002

His research interests include various aspects of interactive
information retrieval/seeking, especially in the context of online
social networks and collaborations, contextual information mining,
and applications of social media services for exploring critical
socio-political issues. At Rutgers, he runs a research group on
Information Seeking and Behavior (http://www.infoseeking.org/) as
well as special interest groups on Collaborative Information Seeking
and Social Information Seeking. He has published numerous papers
in journals and conferences relating to these topics, and specific to
collaborative information seeking (CIS). His co-authored paper for
SIGIR 2008 titled “Algorithmic Mediation for Collaborative
Exploratory Search” won the best paper award. He co-organized
workshops on CIS at ACM Group 2010 and ASIST 2011
conferences.
He
has
developed
Coagmento
system

[10] Shah, C. (2010). Collaborative Information Seeking: A
Literature Review. Advances in Librarianship, 32, 3-33.
doi:10.1108/S0065-2830(2010)0000032004
[11] Shah, C. (2012). Collaborative Information Seeking: The Art
and Science of Making The Whole Greater Than The Sum of
All (The Information Retrieval Series) (p. 212). Springer.
Retrieved from http://www.amazon.com/CollaborativeInformation-Seeking-Science-Retrieval/dp/364228812X
[12] Twidale, M. B. T., Nichols, D. M. N., & Paice, C. D. (1997).
Browsing is a Collaborative Process. Information Processing
and Management, 33(6), 761-783.

1199

