Medical Information Retrieval
An Instance of Domain-Specific Search
Allan Hanbury
Institute of Software Technology and Interactive Systems
Vienna University of Technology
Favoritenstraße 9-11/188
Vienna, Austria

hanbury@ifs.tuwien.ac.at

ABSTRACT
Due to an explosion in the amount of medical information
available, search techniques are gaining importance in the
medical domain. This tutorial discusses recent results on
search in the medical domain, including the outcome of surveys on end user requirements, research relevant to the field,
and current medical and health search applications available.
Finally, the extent to which available techniques meet user
requirements are discussed, and open challenges in the field
are identified.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information
Search and Retrieval; J.3 [Life and Medical Sciences]:
Medical Information Systems

Keywords
Information Retrieval, Domain-Specific Search, Medical Information, End User Requirements

1.

TUTORIAL SUMMARY

Search techniques are becoming increasingly important in
the medical domain, in particular due to an explosion in the
amount of medical information available. This includes both
patient-specific information (e.g. electronic health records)
and knowledge-based information (e.g. scientific papers).
The increasing emphasis on the use of evidence-based medicine
(using the best evidence from the scientific literature in clinical decision making) also increases the importance of search
in medical practice [10]. Furthermore, the secondary use of
anonymized electronic health records for facilitating research
and improving quality in medical practice is also gaining in
importance [7]. This use of health records also requires IR
techniques, and has been modelled in the new TREC medical records track in 2011.
All parties involved in medical treatment are regularly
faced with an information need that cannot be met from
their own store of knowledge. Medical information search is
a classic example of a domain-specific search, but the medical domain is so complex that simply limiting the target documents to those in the medical domain and indexing with a
standard search engine is not sufficient. The range of sources
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

of medical information (primary research sources, secondary
research sources, web pages and popular publications, etc.)
and the range of end users (members of the general public, general practitioners, specialists, researchers, etc.) lead
to complex requirements. Recent work in the Khresmoi
project1 has collected end user requirements for search in
the medical domain through online surveys, interviews and
observation [17, 9, 3, 14]. The results of the requirement
analysis are presented based on a model of domain-specific
search, for which the following aspects need to be specified:
information sources to restrict the search, search refinements
that can improve the access to information in the domain,
and end users and their tasks.
Although many groups of people search for information
in the medical domain, the analysis in the Khresmoi project
has been restricted to three of the most important groups:
search by physicians, search by members of the general public and search by radiologists (a subset of physicians for
which search in images is of particular importance). Different end users have different requirements based on the
technical level (accessibly or technically written), level of
specificity (overview or in-depth), type of research paper
(primary or secondary), language of the results, etc. Naturally, the trustworthiness of medical information is of particular importance. Analyses of search behaviour based on
search engine log files have also been done [4, 18].
For physicians, an unmet information need has been reported as occurring for 2 of every 3 patients seen [11], or for
41% of the questions they pursued [6]. This requires that
they attempt to meet this information need by using available resources, which has traditionally involved searching in
printed sources and asking colleagues, although searching on
the Internet is of increasing importance. The Khresmoi survey has shown that the three most common sources of online
information used by physicians (in decreasing order of usage) are: general search engines (e.g. Google, Bing, Yahoo!),
medical research databases (e.g. Pubmed) and Wikipedia.
Image search is particularly important in the medical domain, especially for radiologists [16]. Internet image search
applications are starting to appear (e.g. Goldminer, Yottalook). However, image search within Picture Archiving
and Communication Systems (PACS) in hospitals is also being developed [15].
Patients also have regular information needs, illustrated
by the fact that 61% of American Adults seek out health advice online [8]. The Khresmoi survey of the general public
1

1191

http://khresmoi.eu

revealed that the most common sources of online information used by this group are: general search engines (e.g.
Google, Bing, Yahoo!), web sites providing health information (e.g. university, hospital, pharmaceutical company) and
Wikipedia. However, as this group has had less training in
interpreting the information found, issues such as trustworthiness of the information and cyberchondria [20] gain more
importance.
A number of publications of work towards meeting the requirements for search in the medical domain have recently
appeared. This includes work on estimating the granularity
of information in a document [21], estimating the difficulty
of a document [5, 12], the quality of documents [19], document summarization [1] and the use of terminology resources
for query refinement [13]. Cross-lingual search is of importance for end users at all levels [2]. The tutorial presents
how well this work meets the requirements and discusses
the remaining challenges for search in the medical domain.

2.

[9]

[10]
[11]

[12]

[13]

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The research leading to these results has received funding
from the European Union Seventh Framework Programme
(FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement no. 257528 (KHRESMOI).

[14]

[15]

3.

REFERENCES
[16]

[1] S. Afantenos, V. Karkaletsis, and P. Stamatopoulos.
Summarization from medical documents: a survey.
Artif. Intell. Med., 33:157–177, 2005.
[2] S. Bedrick. Improving access to medical literature
using multilingual search interfaces. In Proc.
MEDINFO, 2010.
[3] C. Boyer, M. Gschwandtner, A. Hanbury, M. Kritz,
N. Pletneva, M. Samwald, and A. Vargas. Use case
definition including concrete data requirements.
Technical Report D8.2, Khresmoi project, 2012.
[4] M.-A. Cartright, R. W. White, and E. Horvitz.
Intentions and attention in exploratory health search.
In Proceedings of the 34th international ACM SIGIR
conference on Research and development in
Information Retrieval, pages 65–74. ACM, 2011.
[5] K. Collins-Thompson, P. N. Bennett, R. W. White,
S. de la Chica, and D. Sontag. Personalizing web
search results by reading level. In Proceedings of the
20th ACM international conference on Information
and knowledge management, pages 403–412. ACM,
2011.
[6] J. W. Ely, J. A. Osheroff, S. M. Maviglia, and M. E.
Rosenbaum. Patient-care questions that physicians are
unable to answer. Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association, 14(4):407–414, 2007.
[7] M. A. Feufel, G. Antes, J. Steurer, G. Gigerenzer,
J. A. Muir Gray, M. Mäkelä, A. G. Mulley, Jr., D. E.
Nelson, J. Schulkin, H. Schünemann, J. E. Wennberg,
and C. Wild. What is needed for better health care:
Better systems, better patients or both? In
G. Gigerenzer and J. A. Muir Gray, editors, Better
Doctors, Better Patients, Better Decisions:
Envisioning Health Care 2020, pages 117–134. MIT
Press, 2011.
[8] S. Fox and S. Jones. The social life of health

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

1192

information. Technical report, Pew Internet &
American Life Project Report, 2009.
M. Gschwandtner, M. Kritz, and C. Boyer.
Requirements of the health professional search.
Technical Report D8.1.2, Khresmoi project, 2011.
W. R. Hersh. Information Retrieval: A Health and
Biomedical Perspective. Springer, 3rd edition, 2009.
W. R. Hersh and D. H. Hickam. How well do
physicians use electronic information retrieval
systems? A framework for investigation and
systematic review. Journal of the American Medical
Association, 280(15):1347–1352, 1998.
G. Leroy and J. E. Endicott. Combining nlp with
evidence-based methods to find text metrics related to
perceived and actual text difficulty. In Proceedings of
the 2nd ACM SIGHIT International Health
Informatics Symposium, pages 749–754. ACM, 2012.
G. Luo and C. Tang. On iterative intelligent medical
search. In Proceedings of the 31st annual international
ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development
in information retrieval, pages 3–10. ACM, 2008.
H. Müller. Report on image use behaviour and
requirements. Technical Report D9.1, Khresmoi
project, 2011.
H. Müller and T. M. Deserno. Content-based medical
image retrieval. In Biomedical Image Processing Methods and Applications. Springer, 2011.
H. Müller, C. Despont-Gros, W. Hersh, J. Jensen,
C. Lovis, and A. Geissbuhler. Health care
professionals’ image use and search behaviour. In
Proc. Medical Informatics Europe, pages 24–32, 2006.
N. Pletneva, A. Vargas, and C. Boyer. Requirements
for the general public health search. Technical Report
D8.1.1, Khresmoi project, 2011.
D. Rubin, A. Flanders, W. Kim, K. Siddiqui, and
C. Kahn. Ontology-assisted analysis of web queries to
determine the knowledge radiologists seek. Journal of
Digital Imaging, 24:160–164, 2011.
T. Tang, N. Craswell, D. Hawking, K. Griffiths, and
H. Christensen. Quality and relevance of
domain-specific search: A case study in mental health.
Information Retrieval, 9:207–225, 2006.
R. W. White and E. Horvitz. Cyberchondria: Studies
of the escalation of medical concerns in web search.
ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., 27:23:1–23:37, November 2009.
X. Yan, R. Y. Lau, D. Song, X. Li, and J. Ma. Toward
a semantic granularity model for domain-specific
information retrieval. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst.,
29:15:1–15:46, July 2011.

