Information Retrieval for E-Discovery
David D. Lewis,
David D. Lewis Consulting, sigir2012tutorial@DavidDLewis.com

Abstract: This tutorial will introduce the IR issues posed by
the "discovery" process in legal cases, i.e. the requirement that
parties turn over documents responsive (relevant) to the issues at
dispute. The explosion of electronically stored information has
created a multi-billion dollar market in technology and services for
discovery on electronically stored information (e-discovery).

Bio: David D. Lewis is an independent consultant working in the
areas of information retrieval, text mining, machine learning,
natural language processing, and the statistical evaluation of
complex information systems. He previously held research
positions at AT&T Labs, Bell Labs, and the University of
Chicago. Lewis has published more than 75 scientific papers and
is an inventor on 8 patents on information retrieval and text
mining technology. He has presented over 20 tutorials on topics
in machine learning and language processing at a range of
conferences, including SIGIR, KDD, ACL, JSM, ASIS,
Infonortics, and others, as well as lecturing widely at universities,
businesses, and industry events. He was a member of committees
that designed and administered the U.S. government MUC and
TREC evaluations of language processing technologies. He was
elected a Fellow of the American Association for the
Advancement of Science in 2006.

I will discuss the discovery process, the scale and diversity of
materials to be searched, and the economics of identifying and
reviewing potentially responsive material. I will then focus on
three major IR areas: search, supervised learning (including text
classification), and relevance assessment. For each, I will discuss
the technologies used in e-discovery, and research results that
have not yet seen commercial practice. I will particularly
concentrate on evaluation issues, which are crucial to acceptance
of these technologies in a legal context. I will also outline
research directions in IR for e-discovery, and in particular ones
where progress can be made without access to "realistic" test
collections.
Connections will be drawn with the use of IR in
related tasks, such as enterprise search, criminal investigations,
intelligence analysis, historical research, truth and reconciliation
commissions, and freedom of information (open records or
sunshine law) requests.

Dr. Lewis was one of the founders of the TREC Legal Track, the
first large scale open evaluation of information retrieval
technology for electronic discovery in legal cases. As part of the
Legal Track work, he created the first large scale test collection
for experimentation on electronic discovery, the IIT CDIP test
collection. Dr. Lewis has also served as a consulting expert or
expert witness in a number of legal cases. He was a testifying
expert in Kleen Products, LLC, et al. v. Packaging Corporation of
America, et al., a US Federal Court case involving issues of
information retrieval, machine learning, and statistical sampling in
e-discovery.

ACM Categories & Descriptors: H.3.3 Information
Search and Retrieval; H.4.1 Office Automation; I.2.1 Artificial
Intelligence, Applications and Expert Systems - Law

Keywords: computer forensics, document formats, duplicate
detection, machine learning, e-mail, electronic mail, OCR, text
mining, sampling, effectiveness, confidence intervals

.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

1202

