Studies of the Onset and Persistence
of Medical Concerns in Search Logs
Ryen W. White

Eric Horvitz

Microsoft Research
One Microsoft Way
Redmond, WA 98052

Microsoft Research
One Microsoft Way
Redmond, WA 98052

ryenw@microsoft.com

horvitz@microsoft.com
We explore how medical concerns emerge over time and how
these concerns persist after their onset. Within-session analysis is
limited in this context as it may not capture the behavior preceding the onset of searches for a condition, meaning that we may not
observe changes from symptoms (i.e., an observed departure from
normal function or feeling such as headache or chest pain) to conditions (i.e., a disease or disorder such as brain tumor or heart
attack) within session boundaries. Indeed as we show in our analysis of large-scale search logs, about 60% of medical search sessions start directly with a condition query1. The relationship between log-based signs of the onset of concerns and longer-term
search behavior following a search diagnostic on the implications
of a symptom may or may not be tightly linked; search on conditions may be initiated by external factors such as diagnosis provided by a medical professional or prior searching (in the log data
in our study, around 95% of sessions originating with a condition
had medical searches in previous sessions). Regardless, a better
understanding of the behavior may provide valuable clues about
searchers’ medical trajectories that search engines might use to
help searchers (e.g., by predicting emerging concerns and personalizing the search experience).

ABSTRACT
The Web provides a wealth of information about medical symptoms and disorders. Although this content is often valuable to
consumers, studies have found that interaction with Web content
may heighten anxiety and stimulate healthcare utilization. We
present a longitudinal log-based study of medical search and
browsing behavior on the Web. We characterize how users focus
on particular medical concerns and how concerns persist and influence future behavior, including changes in focus of attention in
searching and browsing for health information. We build and
evaluate models that predict transitions from searches on symptoms to searches on health conditions, and escalations from symptoms to serious illnesses. We study the influence that the prior
onset of concerns may have on future behavior, including sudden
shifts back to searching on the concern amidst other searches. Our
findings have implications for refining Web search and retrieval
to support people pursuing diagnostic information.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search
and Retrieval – search process, information filtering

We analyze search and browsing data gathered from a sample of
approximately 170 thousand consenting toolbar users over a threemonth period. Contributions extending from the analysis include:

Keywords
Health search; medical search; cyberchondria.

1. INTRODUCTION

• Characterizing how health-related concerns emerge in search
activity over time, including key aspects of this process such
as escalations in the severity of conditions searched.
• Analyzing aspects of the persistence of concerns after the onset, including associated interruptions to future search tasks
and changes in the searcher’s focus of attention thereafter.
• Construction and evaluation of machine-learned models to
predict medical condition onset, escalations, and likely interruptions in future sessions given a user’s search history.
• Proposal of design implications based on our findings that
can help inform the development of search tools to monitor
and proactively support online medical searching.

People often turn to the Web to find information about medical
concerns. A recent study found that 80% of Web users have performed online medical searches [12]. Framed by the popularity of
health-related search, we seek to better understand how users find
medical information online, with the goal of developing tools to
better support search for medical information. Researchers have
investigated the search behavior of medical domain experts (e.g.,
[5]) and the reliability of online medical content (e.g., [11]).
Search log data provides unique insight into the natural search
behaviors of search engine users, and a number of studies have
used that type of data to investigate how users find medical information. Studies to date have largely focused on medical search
behavior within one session and examined issues such as the escalation of basic symptoms to more serious concerns [24] or decisions about when to seek a consultation with a health professional
[25]. However, medical searches span multiple sessions and are
connected over time, as people monitor symptoms and adapt their
lines of inquiry based on exposure to information found on the
Web and other sources (e.g., professional diagnoses) [2].

Through improved understanding and modeling of emerging concerns, we can help searchers make better decisions on their own
health seeking and guide engagement with medical professionals.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2
describes related work in such areas as medical search and longterm user profiling. Section 3 describes the data and how we use it
to build the long-term user profiles necessary for our study. In
Section 4, we present findings of our analysis characterizing the
onset and persistence of medical concerns over time. Section 5
focuses on predicting: (i) the onset on concerns, (ii) escalations to
searches about serious illnesses, and (iii) interruptions of future

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise,
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior
specific permission and/or a fee.
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
Copyright 2012 ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08...$15.00.

1

For 81% of search sessions containing terms indicating a specific
medical condition, the session started with the same condition.

265

searches on other topics with returns to the healthcare concern at
focus. Section 6 discusses our findings, their implications, and
opportunities for future study. We conclude in Section 7.

desktop documents and showed that this information could be
used to re-rank search results and improve relevance for individuals. Matthijs and Radlinski [14] constructed user profiles using
users’ browsing histories, and evaluated their approach using an
interleaving methodology. Tan et al. [18] focused only on the
most relevant prior queries and constructed language models for
this task. Although this work has been carried out in the context of
general Web search, it has special applicability to medical search.

2. RELATED WORK
Web interaction logs have been used previously to study medical
Web search behavior. Bhavnani et al. [6] demonstrated that Web
page term co-occurrence of medical symptoms and disorders can
reasonably predict the degree of influence on search behavior.
Spink et al. [17] characterized healthcare-related queries issued to
Web search engines and showed that users were gradually shifting
from general-purpose search engines to specialized Web sites for
medical- and health-related queries. White and Horvitz [24] used
a log-based methodology to study escalations in medical concerns
during Web search (shifts from search on common symptoms to
searches on serious ailments) a behavior that they termed cyberchondria. Their work highlighted the potential influence of several biases of judgment demonstrated by people and search engines
themselves, including base-rate neglect and availability. In a follow-up study, White and Horvitz [25] examined the occurrence of
escalation from symptoms to searches for local medical professionals and facilities such as nearby hospitals. Cartright et al. [8]
studied differences in search behaviors associated with diagnosis
vs. more general health-related information seeking. They decomposed health information seeking into evidence-based (search on
relevance of signs and symptoms) and hypothesis-based (search
on conditions and treatments), and studied how medical foci
evolve during exploratory health search sessions.

The medical community has studied the effects of health anxiety
disorders, including hypochondriasis, over time [1], but not in the
context of Web search. Health anxiety is problematic since it is
often maladaptive (i.e., out of proportion with the degree of medical risk) and amplified by the fact that those affected are often
undiscerning about the source of their medical information [19].
Such anxiety usually persists even after an evaluation by a physician and reassurance that concerns about symptoms lack an underlying medical basis. Beyond interactions with medical professionals, patients’ health concerns may manifest in other ways such as
search behavior, an assertion supported by [23], which showed
that those whom self-identified as hypochondriacs searched more
often for health information than average Web searchers.
Despite the popularity of medical Web content, there is a need for
improved information services to the medical information consumer. Cline and Haynes [7] present a review of work in this area
that suggests that public health professionals should be concerned
about online health seeking, consider potential benefits, synthesize quality concerns, and identify criteria for evaluating online
health information. Eysenbach and Kohler [11] used focus groups
and naturalistic observation to study users attempting assigned
search tasks on the Web. They found that the credibility of Web
sites (in terms of source, design, appearance, language used, and
ease of use) was important in the focus group setting, but that, in
practice, many participants largely ignored source. Some organizations have already started efforts to improve the general quality
of medical information on the Web, such as the Health on the Net
Foundation [12]. Others have studied enhancing Web pages or
search results with tools to support credibility assessment [16].
Eastin and Guinsler [10] showed that an individual’s level of
health anxiety moderates the relationship between health seeking
and healthcare utilization decisions. White and Horvitz [26]
demonstrated a relationship between the nature and structure of
Web page content and the likelihood that users would escalate
their concerns as observed in downstream behavior (e.g., the order
in which serious and non-serious explanations for symptoms appeared on the page and the distance between these mentions).

The research described above largely focused on medical search
behavior within a single session. Several pieces of prior work
explore the pursuit of health information across multiple sessions.
White and Horvitz [24] framed directions with longer-term analyses including a study of the recurrence of concerns over multiple
sessions and interruptions of non-medical searches with return to
the pursuit of a health concern. They showed that 13.5% of the
medical searchers in the logs they studied exhibited recurrence in
medical searches, mainly for symptoms (50.8% of users reissued
queries for the same symptoms over multiple sessions). In other
cross-session research, White and Horvitz [25] show how using
evidence drawn from multiple search sessions can enhance the
performance of a classifier that predicts the search for local
healthcare resources. Another study of medical search behavior
over time was conducted by Ayers and Kronenfeld [2] who used
Web log data in a multiple regression analysis exploring the relationship between chronic medical conditions and frequency of
Web use, as well as changes in health behavior associated with
Web usage. Their findings suggest that Web use was influenced
not only by the presence of one particular chronic illness but by
the total number of chronic conditions. They also found that the
more often someone uses the Web as a source of health information, the more likely they will alter their health behavior based
on the information they encounter online.

We believe that much more can be learned from studying health
information-seeking behaviors over time, and we perform a longitudinal study with that focus. Our work differs from prior research
in a number of ways. First, we study the emergence, onset, and the
persistence of medical concerns over time as observable in search
queries. Second, we leverage a log-based methodology that provides data in the wild from a large sample of consenting users
over many search sessions, rather than relying on running user
studies, or within-query and within-session log analysis. Finally,
we develop predictive models of whether onsets will occur, the
nature of the onset, and its persistence, rather than immediate
health-related actions such as within-session escalations.

Prior research has used long-term histories more generally to improve search and recommendation effectiveness, typically learning a user’s profile from either browsing or search history. White
et al. [21] investigated the utility of different contextual sources
and their combinations for a URL recommendation task. They
found that models constructed from historic data for each user
most accurately predict users’ longer-term future interests.
Piwowarski and Zaragoza [15] explored three different predictive
click models using historical and social contexts, in a Web search
setting trying to predict relationships between queries and documents. Teevan et al. [20] constructed user profiles from indexed

3. BUILDING USER PROFILES
To study long-term medical search behavior, we needed to build
long-term search profiles for each user in our log data. We begin
by describing the data and profile construction method.

266

Table 1. Summary statistics of long-term medical profiles.
Mean and standard deviation (SD) are reported.

3.1 Data
We use anonymized logs of URLs visited by users who consented
to provide data through a widely distributed browser toolbar. We
gathered data over a three-month period (January 2011 March
2011). Log entries included a unique user identifier, a timestamp
for each page view, and the URL of the page visited. We excluded
intranet and secure (https) URL visits at the source. To remove
variability caused by cultural and linguistic variation in search
behavior, we only include log entries generated by users in the
English-speaking United States locale. From these logs, we extracted search sessions on Google, Yahoo!, and Bing via a similar
methodology to White and Drucker [22]. Search sessions comprised queries, clicks on search results, and pages visited during
navigation once users left the search engine. Search sessions ended after a period of user inactivity exceeding 30 minutes.

Statistic (n=169,513)

We assigned topical labels to extracted URLs to identify which
were medically related. We assigned URLs in our dataset to categories in the Open Directory Project (ODP, dmoz.org) in an automated manner using a content-based classifier, described and
evaluated in [4]. The classifier employs logistic regression to predict the ODP category for a Web page, resulting in a label for
. To lessen the impact of
each page such as
small differences in assigned labels, we use only 219 categories at
the top two levels of the ODP hierarchy. The findings in [4] revealed that, when optimized for the score in each category, the
content-based classifier has a micro-average F1 of 0.60, which we
believed was sufficient for our purposes.
To identify searchers showing evidence of health-seeking intent,
we constructed profiles for a randomly selected subset of users
who had visited at least one URL labeled with the
category of the ODP2. We removed outlier users (approximately the
most active 1% of users) who visited large numbers of URLs in
the study duration (as likely traffic generated by robotic systems).
The resultant set of approximately 170,000 users, conducted over
25 million search sessions and visited over one billion URLs over
the three-month duration of study. The average number of browsing sessions per user was around 240 (of which around 150 were
search sessions), spanning on average 76 days per participant.

1112.32

# medical queries (click)

36.67

60.29

% queries medical (click)

3.4%

4.3%

# medical queries (wordlist)

10.31

17.90

# queries with serious illnesses

4.60

8.68

# unique serious illnesses

1.69

1.60

# queries with benign explanations

1.86

5.81

# unique benign explanations

0.70

1.05

# queries with symptoms

4.15

11.39

# unique symptoms

1.23

1.75

# URLs

5738.76

5968.84

# medical URLs

190.65

317.53

% URLs that are medical

3.9%

4.6%

# search sessions

153.40

91.55

# medical sessions

37.04

32.05

The user profiles conducted as described in this section were used
to pursue answers to three research questions:
Q1: What are some key characteristics of the long-term profiles
generated to study health seeking over time?
Q2: What are characteristics of how health-related concerns
emerge in search activity over time, including key aspects of
this process such as escalations in the severity of conditions
searched?
Q3: How do searches for the condition persist following evidence of an initial onset of concern, in terms of related medical searches and specifics such as interruptions in future
search sessions and changes in searchers’ focus of attention?
Answers to these questions could provide valuable insights to
search system designers.

In addition to labeling URL content using a text classifier, we also
automatically labeled the search queries issued by users based on
whether they contain symptoms (e.g., headache), benign explanations (e.g., caffeine withdrawal), serious illnesses (e.g., brain tumor), or some combination of these types of medical concern. To
perform the labeling, we leveraged lists of relatively common
symptoms, as well as benign and more serious illnesses. Specifically, we used the following sources for each class of concern:

4. CHARACTERIZING BEHAVIORS

• Symptoms: Symptom list from the Merck medical dictionary.
The same list of symptoms has been used in previous analysis of search behavior [8] to identify health-related sessions.
• Benign explanations: List of commonly occurring conditions,
as defined in [24] and used in that study for a log-based analysis of online search behavior. The wordlist is based on the
International Classification of Diseases 10th Edition (ICD10) published by the World Health Organization.
• Serious illnesses: List of serious conditions defined in [24].

We divide this section into three parts: (i) we provide an overview
of medical search behavior in the data set (Section 4.1), (ii) we
characterize aspects of the onset of medical conditions (Section
4.2), and (iii) we analyze the persistence of the condition searching following the condition onset (Section 4.3).

4.1 Medical Searching Over Time (Q1)
We begin with an overview of medical search behavior over time,
averaged on a per-user basis. Table 1 lists summary statistics over
the available log data in the three-month period studied. Note that
for the purposes of this analysis, a medical session is defined as a
search session where the user has issued a medical search query or
visited a URL labeled with the
category of the ODP (or a
sub-category). A medical query is defined in two ways: wordlist –

In the log-centric analysis, we also used synonyms of symptoms
and conditions to increase coverage (e.g., including “tiredness” in
addition to “fatigue”). Synonyms for each symptom or condition
We excluded URLs in the

SD

1076.31

were identified via a two-step walk on the search engine click
graph using an approach similar to that described in [3]. The automatically-generated lists of synonyms were reviewed by the
authors to remove erroneous list entries (e.g., all astrology-related
synonyms were removed for the serious illness “cancer”). To
count as a match on one or more of the concern types, a query
needed to be an exact match against the concern or one of its synonyms as generated using the walk described above. We avoided
substring matches to ensure high precision in labeling queries.

3.2 Long-Term Profile Generation

2

Mean

# queries

category.

267

start with a symptom and 57.8% of medical sessions start with a
condition. As suggested in previous work [8], searchers may
begin with a hypothesis and refine that based on evidence gathered during the session. The longitudinal methodology provides
us with insight into user behavior before the session that can help
us to better understand how these concerns first emerge.

4.2 Condition Onset (Q2)
We now explore the search behavior of users prior to the first
occurrence of a particular condition of interest across the threemonth study duration. We refer to the first query that the user
issues related to this condition as the condition onset. In identifying the onset, we randomly selected one condition per user from
that user’s long-term profile. Although the onset is the first instance of the selected condition in the user’s long-term search
history, their pre-onset history can contain other conditions that
may have been searched for before the onset. Allowing users to
explore multiple conditions more accurately reflects real Web
search behavior than, say, limiting our analysis to the first instance of any condition in the long-term profiles. That said, this
may not have been hugely impactful since 83% searched for at
most one other condition prior to onset (61% searched for none).

Figure 1. Distribution of medical queries per concern type.
Queries are labeled using the wordlist method.
query contains at least one of the symptoms, benign explanations,
or serious illnesses defined earlier, or click – a query resulting in a
search engine result page (SERP) click on a page labeled in the
category of the ODP. The click method has better coverage since it does not depend on string matching. However, since
much of our analysis uses the wordlist method (since it is more
precise and already broken into conditions, symptoms, etc.), we
also report statistics on that.

For each randomly selected onset condition, we extracted all queries and URL visits before its onset, extending back to the beginning of the available search logs for that user. We also extracted
the behavior for that user after the condition onset, and we use
that to study aspects of the estimated impact of the condition on
future search behavior, as described later in the paper. The extraction process yielded 158,917 pre-onset histories, one per user. We
begin by studying the search behavior in these histories.

From the findings presented in Table 1, we can see the average
user in our dataset issued 10 15 queries per day. Of those queries, around 3% are medically related. It is worth noting the high
standard deviation values for some of the medical statistics, such
as the # medical queries. As noted previously [23], there are users
who may be more likely to search for medical information (e.g.,
those affected by health anxiety). We retained these and other
outliers to more fully represent the distribution of Web searchers.

4.2.1 Pre-Onset Search Behaviors
We look at a number of variables capturing users’ medical search
behavior. From pre-onset behavior, we computed the following:
• Number of queries
• Number of URLs: Number of non-SERP URLs visited.
• Number of medical queries: Number of medical queries, defined using the wordlist and click methods from earlier.
• Number of medical URLs: Number of non-SERP URLs that
category of the ODP.
are labeled as being in the
• Fraction of URLs medical: Fraction of all non-SERP URLs
that are labeled as being medical.
• Total time to onset: Total timespan to the onset of the condition from the start of the log data for that user.
• Total time online: Total time that user spends searching
online (sum of all dwell time for pages in search sessions).
• Fraction time online: Fraction of the time between the start
of the log data and the onset that the user spends online.
• Fraction online time on medical URLs
• Number of search sessions
• Number of medical search sessions

Table 1 also shows that users are querying more often for symptoms and serious illnesses than common, benign explanations. It is
important to understand the composition of medical queries that
users are issuing since it has direct implications for the type of
support that search engines should offer. With that in mind, we
performed further analysis of the queries in medical sessions.

4.1.1 Query Composition
Figure 1 shows the fraction of medical queries (from those that
could be labeled according to our wordlist method) that contain
each of the seven possible combinations of the three concern
types. The figure shows that searching for a single concern type is
most common, with 97.3% of labeled medical queries containing
only a single type of concern (and 94.6% of those queries containing only a single concern). Serious illnesses and symptoms are the
most popular concern types that searchers pursue. Interestingly,
and somewhat concerningly, searches for serious illnesses occur
around two-and-a-half times as often as searches for benign explanations, even though the benign explanations of symptoms are
typically much more likely given prevalence statistics.

We also compute the same four features for the symptoms and
conditions observed in the pre-onset history, e.g., for symptoms:
• Number of queries with symptoms
• Number of unique symptoms
• Symptom persistence: Time for which a symptom persists,
computed as timespan between its first and last occurrence.
• Number of symptom sessions: Number of sessions that contained at least one query with a symptom.

4.1.2 Symptoms and Conditions
Turning our attention to the role of symptoms and conditions in
the medical sessions, we found that 80.7% of sessions that contain
a medical condition (serious or benign), start with that condition
immediately. In contrast only, 49.8% of the sessions containing a
medical symptom start with a symptom. If we compute the percentages across all medical sessions, regardless of whether they
contain a medical symptom, the differences between symptoms
and conditions are amplified. Overall, 17.6% of medical sessions

The mean (M) and standard deviation (SD) pre-onset variable
values for all conditions are reported in the
column in Table 3.
There were about 50 days of user behavior in our logs on average

268

begin with a condition directly (around 60% as reported earlier in
the paper), it is important to also consider another transition type:
between-session escalations and non-escalations, where the onset
condition is still related to a preceding symptom, but that symptom occurs outside of the current session. Figure 2 illustrates the
two types of escalation. Queries are represented as circles, Web
pages by rectangles, and different types of escalation by singleline arrows (e.g., [lump] [cancer] within a single session).

before the onset of the condition of interest. Users performed
around 20 medical search sessions in that time, spent 8% of their
total time searching online and they spent around 3% of their
online time examining medical content. Users generally focused
on a single symptom and a single condition in the pre-onset phase.
Symptom searches persisted for around four days on average,
whereas condition searches persisted for around six days.
To understand the relatedness between the symptoms observed in
user search histories and the onset conditions, we used the serious-illness symptom and common-explanation symptom mappings from a prior study by White and Horvitz [24]. In that study,
the authors mapped 12 commonly occurring symptoms (e.g., chest
pain, dizziness) to one or more of over 100 conditions based on a
review of medical literature. In this study, we first extracted all
onset-condition symptom pairs from each user’s search history,
computed synonyms for each using the method described earlier,
and filtered to retain pairs with one of the 12 common symptoms
from [24]. In total, 79.5% of the filtered condition-symptom pairs
observed for a user comprised a correct mapping from a symptom
to a condition likely to cause it. The high match shows that across
many sessions, the symptoms and the onset-condition are strongly
related; even if it takes time for queries mentioning the condition
directly to be visible in the query stream, there are indications that
its emergence extends back over time.

Figure 2. Examples of different escalation types.
To reduce the likelihood that the symptom is unrelated to the condition, we used the serious illness symptom and benign explanation symptom mappings described earlier (that restricts the condition-symptom pairs considered to those with a known association) and required that the gap between the symptom and the illness/explanation be at most seven days. We found that withinsession escalations occur within three minutes of the symptom
query (M=2.57 minutes, SD=4.33 minutes) similar to previous
work [24], whereas between-session escalations typically happen
within 2−3 days of the symptom (M=2.28 days, SD=1.94 days).
We show later that observing escalations leads to better predictive
models of the onset condition and post-onset interruptions.

4.2.2 Effects of Other Factors
In addition to behavior over all onsets, we also studied the effect
of two marginalizations: condition severity and transition type.

4.2.2.1 Condition Severity
From all of pre-onsets available, we selected those where the onset condition was a serious illness or a benign explanation; the
7,104 onsets based on queries containing both severity types were
removed for this marginalization analysis. The feature values for
each of the classes are reported in third and fourth data columns of
Table 3. Given the large sample sizes, all differences between
severity types across all variables were significant using one-way
multivariate analyses of variance (MANOVA) ( (2,310727) =
5.81, < .01). All paired differences for each variable between
the severity types were also significant at < .013 using Tukey
post-hoc testing. There are some noteworthy differences seen with
searchers starting with benign versus serious conditions. We
found that the % medical queries, # symptom queries, # condition
queries, and # medical queries features show that the onset of
benign explanations was typically preceded by more medical
searching than preceded serious illnesses and
(e.g., % medical
queries is 4% for benign explanations but only 3.2% and 3% for
and serious illnesses respectively). One explanation is that
Web search is contributing as a causal influence (rather than just
reflecting user concerns), and that these users are better informed
from reading more Web pages, and hence able to make better
decisions about the condition(s) to which they should transition.

We also computed the values of the features described in the previous section for cases where the onset is a between-session escalation and a between-session non-escalation. The results of this
analysis are shown in Table 3. All differences were again significant using a one-way MANOVA ( (6,321226) = 4.38, < .01).
We can see from Table 3 that escalating and non-escalating users
were typically more active searchers on average (# queries, #
URLs), as well as more active in searching for medical information generally (e.g., % medical queries, # medical sessions).
These users also appear more concerned about symptoms and
conditions, as indicated by features such as # symptom queries
and # condition sessions. Focusing on the four transition types, we
see that histories ending with a between-session escalation or nonescalation had search behavior that differed most significantly
from the overall average. The Between columns are highlighted in
Table 3 for reference. Between-session escalations and nonescalations may result from long-term concerns which affect medical searching behavior over time, or external diagnosis, where
pre-diagnoses concerns are evident in the search log data. Withinsession transitions may be a more local phenomenon that is to a
lesser extent are reflected in long-term online behaviors.

4.2.2.2 Transition Type
As well as studying the severity of the onset condition, we also
examined the effect of the type of transition that the user makes
between symptoms in the pre-onset phase and the onset condition.
Prior work examined within-session escalations in medical concerns [24], where users were observed to transition from searches
on common symptoms such as twitching, to serious illnesses such
as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (also referred to as ALS, motor
neuron disease, and Lou Gehrig’s disease), and within-session
non-escalations, where users transition from querying about
symptoms to benign explanations, such as muscle strain and anxiety. However, given the large volume of medical sessions that

Table 3 presents statistics over all the pre-onset history, irrespective of where the activity occurred. Since prior work has shown
that health behavior changes over time [2], it may also be valuable
to understand the temporal dynamics in these features over the
course of the pre-onset history and proximal to the onset itself.

4.2.3 Temporal Dynamics
We now focus on two temporal aspects of medical searching during the pre-onset behavior: (i) trends over time, and (ii) clusters
containing evidence of periodic medical searching.

269

Table 3. Features of pre-onset search behaviors across all onsets and marginalizations. All differences between groups—All vs.
marginalizations, and between and within marginalizations—are statistically significant at < .05. For cells with two entries, first
is mean (M) and the second is standard deviation (SD). Bold text denotes features explicitly discussed in the body of the paper.
All (n=158,917)
Feature

# queries
# URLs

General health seeking

# medical
queries (wordlist)
# medical
queries (click)
% queries
medical (click)
Time to onset
(days)
Time online (days)
% time online
(of time to onset)
% online time on
medical URLs
# medical sessions

Symptoms

# unique symptoms
# symptom queries
Symptom
persistence (days)
# symptom
sessions

Conditions

# unique conditions
# condition queries
Condition
persistence (days)
# condition
sessions

M
SD
611.95
756.86
4148.02
4750.56
5.90
13.11
19.52
41.04
3.2%
3.8%
49.50
26.21
3.89
4.02
7.9%
8.2%
2.3%
2.1%
21.17
23.34
0.63
1.21
1.98
6.96
3.41
8.78
0.74
1.75
0.74
1.41
1.88
5.68
6.04
12.37
0.94
2.15

Marginalizations
Condition Severity
Transition Type
Gradient Serious
Benign
Escalation
of best-fit illness
explanation
Within
Between
line
(n=117389) (n=34424)
(n=1022) (n=8434)
660.93
778.22
608.79
0.0140 614.13
672.35
888.44
740.20
803.52
4298.50 4659.43
0.0085 3985.72
3875.80
4897.93 5089.18
4698.06
4887.60
7.69
0.1150 5.30
11.64
12.55
12.12
15.48
32.96
23.55
24.58
0.1230 18.02
35.13
29.10
39.58
44.65
73.25
87.25
3.0%
4.0%
4.4%
4.5%
4.0%
4.2%
5.2%
4.3%
51.46
42.84
50.35
45.46
25.96
26.08
26.24
26.07
0.0009 3.93
3.70
4.03
4.28
4.01
4.03
3.87
4.23
7.6%
8.6%
8.0%
9.4%
8.3%
9.3%
9.2%
9.8%
2.3%
2.4%
2.5%
2.9%
2.5%
2.4%
2.9%
3.2%
21.33
22.72
29.23
0.0761 21.09
23.00
24.50
27.59
27.87
2.08
2.40
0.59
0.72
1.57
1.88
1.15
1.33
2.34
7.38
9.53
0.1320 1.81
6.43
7.58
11.83
22.32
3.33
3.43
4.12
4.76
8.75
8.55
10.70
9.84
2.38
3.09
0.86
0.0932 0.68
2.41
3.98
1.61
1.94
1.09
1.49
0.69
0.89
1.74
2.01
1.36
1.55
2.27
3.05
4.19
0.1570 1.74
5.36
6.36
7.78
8.09
6.13
5.96
6.92
0.0400 5.96
12.46
12.08
12.39
13.53
1.34
2.01
1.13
0.0910 0.87
2.50
3.19
2.05
2.43

Non-escalation
Within
(n=439)
733.73
797.96
4666.40
5129.73
13.98
27.07
31.83
63.23
4.3%
4.8%
49.57
25.69
4.46
4.27
9.0%
9.4%
2.6%
3.0%
24.52
27.27
2.18
1.94
9.22
20.34
4.05
8.90
2.73
4.11
1.29
2.01
4.26
10.77
8.06
13.95
1.83
3.47

Between
(n=608)
847.14
880.68
4863.70
5181.13
15.16
33.33
39.06
69.21
4.6%
4.9%
46.64
25.11
4.61
4.27
9.9%
10.3%
3.3%
3.8%
30.15
26.46
2.64
2.15
12.38
22.97
6.02
9.41
3.65
4.76
1.64
2.00
5.36
16.43
5.87
9.55
2.29
3.85

symptom queries, # condition queries) increase over the duration
of the pre-onset history, perhaps as the onset condition and related
symptoms received a greater focus of attention from the searcher.

4.2.3.1 Trends
For each feature, we computed its daily value (sum or average)
across all days in the pre-onset history. If there was no data for a
day, then a value of zero was recorded. The result was a time
series for each feature value. We then computed the line of best fit
for the data and recorded the gradient of the line. If the gradient
was positive, then the feature value increased over the time prior
to the onset (negative: decreased and zero: constant). The average
gradient values for features described in the previous section are
shown in Table 3 under the
column for applicable variables.
In the table, we see that non-medical features such as # URLs or
time spent online are more or less static over the course of the preonset phase. In contrast, the features of the medical search behavior, particularly those focused on symptoms and conditions (#

As well as computing the average gradient across all conditions,
we also studied the gradients by condition to obtain more detailed
insight into temporal effects. Figure 3 shows the average gradient
values for the # symptom queries (which had one of the highest
average gradients in Table 3) across all conditions observed in our
data occurring 100 or more times. Serious illnesses are marked in
dark gray and benign explanations appear in light gray. We can
see that benign explanations generally have a lower gradient than
the serious illnesses, signifying that there may be more gradual
increases in symptom-search frequency related to conditions of
that type. Two more noteworthy observations can be made

270

Figure 3. Distribution of gradients of best fit lines for # symptom queries (per onset condition). Error bars denote standard error.
quent search activity that are related to that condition, and changes in the conditions that searchers’ attend to over time.

from the figure: (i) there is an increase in the acuity of the conditions as average gradient increases and (ii) benign explanations
appearing on the left-hand side of the figure are acute conditions
such as panic attacks and food poisoning, whereas the serious
illnesses on the right-hand side are chronic syndromes and diseases which are stable over time, e.g., diabetes. This analysis shows
that we can estimate some important properties of the onset condition by looking at trends in preceding symptom searching. As we
will show later, these trends have strong predictive value.

4.3.1 Post-Onset Search Behavior
We computed the same features for post-onset behavior as we did
for onset (Table 4). We also show the relative percentage change
between pre-onset and post-onset behaviors in the last column and
features for the onset condition (highlighted), including the number of times the condition recurred post-onset and the total time
spent on the onset condition, the sum of the dwell times of all
pages on click trails following each instance of a condition query.

4.2.3.2 Periodicities in Medical Searching
Considering only temporal trajectories tells us little about how the
features are distributed temporally. Previous work [24] briefly
described the presence of periodicities in medical searching, with
periods of no medical search interspersed with clusters of intense
activity. Here, we identified such clusters for pre-onset histories.

The results of this analysis suggest that users are more active
medical searchers once they focus on a particular condition. All
differences between pre- and post-onset values of the variables in
Table 4 are significant (independent -tests, Bonferroni correction,
all ≤ .002). We observe a drop in symptom searching, perhaps
because they are now focused on a specific condition. The number
of unique conditions actually rises because only 39% of users
perform condition searching pre-onset; post-onset condition
searching is much more common, centered on a single condition.

We define a cluster as a sequence of consecutive medical queries
with at least one symptom or condition query per day. A gap of a
day or more leads to the creation of a new cluster. The average
number of clusters per pre-onset history is 2.83 (SD=2.43), the
average cluster length is around 2.54 days (SD=2.32 days), and
the average periodicity of the clusters is around two weeks
(M=14.50 days, SD=12.70 days). To determine whether periodicity changed as the onset approached, we computed the Pearson
correlation coefficient ( ) between the time between the clusters
and the time from the onset. There was a fairly strong positive
correlation between these variables ( =0.55) showing that as we
move further back in time away from the onset the distance between the clusters increases. In addition, as the time until the condition onset drops, average cluster duration increases ( = 0.64).
Trends in both of these measures suggest that the intensity of the
medical searching increases as the condition onset nears.

We now study ways in which the onset might persist in subsequent search behavior: as interruptions to unrelated search tasks
and in changes to users’ focus of attention over time.

4.3.2 Interruptions
Interruptions refer to a suspension of an ongoing activity and have
been studied in detail in the human-computer interaction and psychology communities (e.g., [9]). The analysis of interruptions to
search activities associated with persistent health concerns was
first introduced in [27]. That research focused on interruptions
caused by escalations or health anxiety, and found that interruptions were largely occurred as recurrent searches for symptoms. In
this paper, we extend our previous work to consider the all interruptions associated with the onset condition (irrespective of the
cause) and the specifically focus on the cost of the interruptions in
terms of time users spent and frequency of occurrence in the logs.

4.2.4 Summary
So far, we have explored aspects of the pre-onset search behavior.
Among other things, we showed that: (i) the nature of the condition and the symptom-onset transition may affect medical search
behavior, and (ii) that symptom and condition searches increase
prior to condition onset (varying by condition type), with an observed increase in the intensity of medical searching. These insights may be useful in predicting outcomes such as condition
onsets, something that we explore in more detail later in the paper.

To study interruptions in our log-based context, we needed a way
to automatically label interruptions so as to be reasonably confident that the user was being interrupted by medical concerns. To
do this, we used the following definition: Given a search session
containing queries and URLs, an interruption comprises at least
one search for the onset condition sandwiched between two series
of one or more non-medical searches. Analysis of the post-onset
data revealed that 30.3% of users were interrupted in this way. Of
those who experienced an interruption, there were 2.39 interrup-

4.3 Persistence of Conditions (Q3)
We now turn attention to post-onset search activity, including
important issues such as the amount of time that searchers spend
searching related to the onset condition, interruptions to subse-

271

Table 4. Features of post-onset search behaviors.
Degree of change from pre-onset behaviors are also shown.

Table 5. Percentage of users who exhibit a narrower
focus of attention post onset.

% change fm
pre-onset

Direction

Distance

Feature

% or M ±SD

% URLs medical

4.9%

88.5

% queries medical

4.2%

31.3

Escalation

23.8%

32.7%

Non-escalation

12.6%

16.6%

% online time on medical pages

8.0%

247.8

# unique symptoms

0.50 ±1.01

20.6

Symptom persistence (days)

2.46 ±3.42

27.9

# unique conditions

1.04 ±1.29

40.5

Condition persistence (days)

7.57 ±12.49

25.3

# onset condition recurrence

2.72 ±4.79

n/a

Time on onset condition (hours)

1.43 ±2.11

n/a

Onset condition persistence

9.97 ±18.69

n/a

# onset condition sessions

1.78 ±1.67

n/a

Within-session

Between-session

focus of attention following the condition onset. These are examples of the types of insights that can only be made through our
novel examination of long-term search behavior.
The paper so far has presented a descriptive analysis of long-term
health-seeking behavior on the Web. We believe that such characterizations are valuable to learn how people pursue medical information online, and can benefit search providers and other researchers working in this area. Although insights can be gleaned
from such analysis that can assist in the design of search systems,
to have direct practical value to search engine users an application
is required. We envision that predictive models based on longterm search behavior will play an increasing role in search systems, monitoring search intentions and managing system intervention. We now explore such predictions in more detail.

tion events and they spent a total of 2 hours 16 minutes searching
for the onset condition (SD=2 hours 31 minutes, max=30 hours 48
minutes). Around 6% of search sessions were interrupted and on
average 2.68 days (of the on-average 27 post-onset days) contained an interruption per user. It seems that the onset of concern
about a condition does have an impact that is in part manifested as
interruptions to other future search behavior. Further evidence for
which the onset condition may affect post-onset behavior is found
by examining what has the user’s focus of attention over time.

5. PREDICTING ONSET & PERSISTENCE
We focus on three tasks: (i) whether users will transition from
symptom searching to condition searching, (ii) whether users will
escalate between-session to a particular condition, and (iii) whether users will be interrupted by the condition post-onset.

4.3.3 Focus of Attention

5.1 Feature Generation

Focus of attention in our context refers to the conditions and/or
symptoms that the searcher is targeting during health seeking.
Cartright et al. [8] studied this concept with a single search session. We expand that research by examining searcher foci postonset and spanning multiple search sessions, specifically looking
at the extent to which searchers focus only on the onset condition.

The features used in the prediction are in four classes: (i) queries,
(ii) pages, (iii) temporal
trends, clusters, and persistence of
symptoms or conditions over time, and (iv) onset features of the
condition onset, used only in the third task to predict interruptions.
Query features: The query length, number of queries, the number
and fraction of queries that are medical, the number of symptoms,
serious illnesses, and benign explanation queries. Counts of the
various escalation and non-escalation types are also included.

We explored the post-onset data for evidence of a narrow (single)
focus of attention once the onset emerged. In particular, we focus
on cases where we observed users searching for at least two
unique conditions (N=27,016), including the onset condition, and
then after condition onset, the user no longer performs any symptom searches and only searches for the onset condition. In analyzing our data, we observe that 27.9% of users exhibited evidence of
such narrowing of their attentional focus post-onset. The effect is
amplified given particular transition types such as escalations.

Page features: The total number of pages, the number and fraction
of pages that are medical, the number of unique medical ODP
categories visited, the total time spent in medical pages, the fraction of the total time online that was spent on medical pages.
Temporal features: Total timespan of the pre-onset history, trends
in the feature values over time, and cluster features, such as their
duration and periodicity. Also included is the persistence of symptoms and conditions over time (time between instances of them).

Table 5 shows the percentage of users with a narrower focus of
attention in their post-onset search behavior, broken down by
transition direction and by transition distance. The findings summarized in the table suggest that a singular focus of attention is
much more likely following escalations, and in particular, following between-session escalations. This may be caused by the escalation, an accumulation of medical information from the Web, or
from real-world sources such as diagnosis or prognosis by a medical professional. If escalations provide clues on the future behavior of users, then they may be useful for predicting search behaviors and in developing tools to proactively support health seeking.

5.2 Methodology and Findings

4.3.4 Summary

5.2.1 Onset

Onset features (only used for prediction task (iii)): Features of the
type of transition, the type of condition, and the distance from the
most recent symptom to the onset, if available.
We constructed classifiers to address each of the three prediction
tasks. We built models using logistic regression, shown to be an
effective classifier for similar tasks in the online medical search
domain [25]. Since the methodology used differed for each task,
we describe the method and the findings separately.

In this subsection we have studied aspects of the persistence of
onset condition and associated behavior. We show that there is a
significant increase in health-search behavior following the emergence of the onset condition, as well as other changes such as a
drop in symptom searching. There is also evidence of interruptions related to the onset condition, as well as a narrowing of the

This task involved predicting whether a user will transition from
symptom searching to condition searching. In the analysis presented so for in this paper, we know when the onset has occurred.
By that point, it might be too late for a search engine to intervene,
and being able to predict whether the onset of a condition will

272

occur in the future could be useful. To do this, we required training data containing all features minus anything condition-related
(since we wanted to predict condition presence) and a label indicating whether the user transitioned to a condition in the future.
To construct the training set, we started at the beginning of the
available log data for each user and determined whether they had
transitioned to a condition search at some point in the future. If
the user had transitioned, then we took the time of the first condition onset (which was on average 45 days from the beginning of
the logs, denoted as
), subtracted a random number of days
(between one and seven) from that time (so that we were not always making the prediction immediately before the onset), and
used data in the resultant timespan to create features. For users
who did not transition to a condition at any point in their log data,
and subtracted a random number of days (from 1−7
we used
days) from that data. This gave us positive examples (search history onset) and negative examples (search history no onset),
one example per user. We selected 5000 examples with an equal
number of positive and negatives, such that the accuracy of a
marginal model that always predicted positive was 50%. We
measured classifier accuracy and used ten-fold cross validation.

Figure 4. ROC curves for each prediction task.
Performance of the marginal model shown as dotted line.
predict whether the user would be interrupted in their future
searching. Indeed, we experimented with only restricting the features used to those in the onset class and found that we were able
to predict with 71.2% accuracy that the user would be interrupted
at some later date by a return to the onset condition.

The findings of the experiments showed that we were able to predict whether a user would transition to a condition with an accuracy of 75.5%, averaged across 100 experimental runs. Important
features included the volume of medical content viewed. Figure 4
shows the receiver-operator characteristic (ROC) curve for the
onset prediction task averaged across all runs. Also shown in the
figure are the curves for the other tasks, which we now describe.
Note that all models perform significantly better than the marginal
model using -tests on the 100 runs ( (198) ≥ 3.34, < .01).

The models and experiments described in this section demonstrate
how key aspects of the condition onset and its estimated impact
can be predicted with good accuracy. As we discuss in the next
section, accurate predictive modeling capabilities afford a range
of possibilities for search engines to better help medical searchers.

6. DISCUSSION AND IMPLICATIONS
We studied the onset and persistence of medical concerns over
time as observed from search log data. This is the first study of its
kind to focus on long-term medical search. During this study we
explored features of the pre-onset search behavior and investigated trends in the feature values and changes in their intensity over
the pre-onset phase. Among other things, we found that:

5.2.2 Escalations
In the analysis presented earlier in the paper, we showed that between session escalations have the potential to cause lasting longterm impact on search behavior. Therefore, we investigated the
prediction of between-session escalation given prior search behavior. The methodology employed is similar to that for the onset
prediction task and the classifier only had access to symptom
features. The positive examples resulted in between-session escalations and the negative examples did not. Once again, we selected 5000 examples for training and test and equally split positive
examples (search history between-session escalation) and negative examples (search history no between-session escalation),
and we used ten-fold cross validation. We attain 76.4% accuracy,
and the most useful features were temporal (especially the symptom gradients) and unique symptom query counts.

• Many pre-onset symptoms were related to the onset condition, even though they could be issued weeks beforehand.
• Symptom and condition searching increases with proximity
to the appearance of evidence of the onset of interest in a
specific condition, and the trends are affected by condition
acuteness.
• The nature of the onset, measured in this study in terms of
severity and transition type (escalations and non-escalations)
affect pre-onset search behavior.
• Medical search behavior post-onset differs from pre-onset,
e.g., symptom searching drops, condition searches increase.
• Interruptions and a narrowing of the focus of attention succeeding and related to the onset condition occur frequently.

5.2.3 Interruptions
The final task involves predicting whether a future interruption is
going to occur given that we have already observed the onset of a
particular condition. Interruptions are defined as in Section 4.3.2.
For this task, we can use all features preceding the onset and also
the features of the onset itself, such as the condition type (e.g.,
serious illness or benign explanation), the transition (e.g., escalation or non-escalation), and the time taken to perform the transition. As before, we selected 5000 random examples, with an equal
number of positives (search history+onset interruption) and
negatives (search history+onset no interruption).

We also showed that we can predict several aspects of the medical
search process, such as condition onset, between-session escalation, and related interruptions to future search activities.
Several refinements of search are suggested by the results. On
one, we can foresee the use of onset occurrence as a cue for a
search engine to leverage that user’s previous clicks for relatedsymptom queries as implicit feedback to enhance the current ranking (similar to [18]). If the search engine predicts the onset it
could also use the set of symptoms previously searched to estimate the condition that the user is likely to transition to and adjust
the search experience based, for example, on severity or incidence
rates. The between-session escalation predictor could be used to
inform the user before they escalate. If the engine can reliably

The results of our analysis show that we were able to attain a prediction accuracy of 80.6% for this task. The features that were
most valuable in making the prediction were related to the nature
of the onset, suggesting that with knowledge of those features
(and no long-term history of search behavior) we would be able to

273

[2] Ayers, S. and Kronenfeld. J. (2007). Chronic illness and
health-seeking information on the Internet. Health, 11(3):
327–347.
[3] Beeferman, D. and Berger, A. (2000). Agglomerative clustering of a search engine query log. KDD, 407–416.
[4] Bennett, P., Svore, K. and Dumais, S. (2010). Classification
enhanced ranking. WWW, 111–120.
[5] Bhavnani, S.K. (2002). Domain-specific search strategies for
the effective retrieval of healthcare and shopping information. SIGCHI, 610–611.
[6] Bhavnani, S.K. et al. (2003). Exploring the distribution of
online healthcare information. SIGCHI, 816–817.
[7] Cline, R.J. and Haynes, K.M. (2001). Consumer health information seeking on the Internet; the state of the art. Health
Education Research, 16(6): 671–692.
[8] Cartright, M., White, R.W., and Horvitz, E. (2011). Intentions and attention in exploratory health search. SIGIR, 65-74
[9] Czerwinski, M., Horvitz, E., and Wilhite, S. (2004). A diary
study of task switching and interruptions. SIGCHI, 175–182.
[10] Eastin, M.S. and Guinsler, N.M. (2006). Worried and wired:
effects of health anxiety on information-seeking and health
care utilization behaviors. Cyber. and Behav., 9(4): 494–498.
[11] Eysenbach, G. and Kohler, C. (2002). How do consumers
search for and appraise health information on the world wide
web? qualitative studies using focus groups, usability test,
and in-depth interviews. Brit. Med. J., 324: 573–577.
[12] Fox, S. (2011). Health topics: 80% of internet users look for
health information online. Pew Internet & Amer. Life Project
[13] Health on the Net Foundation. www.hon.ch/HONcode/Pro.
[14] Matthijs, N. and Radlinski, F. (2011). Personalizing web
search using long-term browsing history. WSDM, 25−34.
[15] Piwowarski, B. and Zaragoza, H. (2007). Predictive user
click models based on click-through history. CIKM, 175-182.
[16] Schwarz, J. and Morris, M.R. (2011). Augmenting web pages
and search results to support credibility assessment. SIGCHI,
1245–1254.
[17] Spink, A. et al. (2004). A study of medical and health queries
to Web search engines. Health Info. and Lib. J., 21: 44–51.
[18] Tan, B., Shen, X., and Zhai, C. (2006). Mining long-term
search history to improve search accuracy. KDD, 718–723.
[19] Taylor, S. and Asmundson, G.J.C. (2004). Treating Health
Anxiety: A Cognitive-Behavioral Approach. Guilford Press.
[20] Teevan, J., Dumais, S.T., and Horvitz, E. (2005). Personalizing search via automated analysis of interests and activities.
SIGIR, 449−456.
[21] White, R.W., Bailey, P., and Chen, L. (2009). Predicting user
interests from contextual information. SIGIR, 363−370.
[22] White, R.W. and Drucker. S.M. (2007). Investigating behavioral variability in web search. WWW, 21–30.
[23] White, R.W. and Horvitz, E. (2009). Experiences with web
search on medical concerns and self-diagnosis. AMIA,
696−700.
[24] White, R.W. and Horvitz, E. (2009). Cyberchondria: studies
of the escalation of medical concerns in web search. TOIS,
27(4): 23.
[25] White, R.W. and Horvitz, E. (2010). Web to world: predicting transitions from self-diagnosis to the pursuit of local
medical assistance in web search. AMIA, 882–886.
[26] White, R.W. and Horvitz, E. (2010). Predicting escalations of
medical queries based on web page structure and content.
SIGIR, 769–770.

estimate that the user is heading toward an escalation, it could
intervene and help the user make an informed decision about what
condition to focus on, perhaps offering a set of common benign
explanations instead, or more generally, prior and posterior probabilities of serious (rarer) illnesses, conditioning the posterior
probabilities on key demographics (e.g., age and gender) and related symptoms, family history, etc. Alternatively, since users
may lose time task switching during interruptions [9], the engine
could anticipate future interruptions given an onset and proactively gather other information to lessen the lag time when the user
returns to a condition search, or provide special support to simplify task switching. The challenge lies in leveraging predictions in a
way that respects the highly sensitive nature of medical information, does not overstate their role or their value, and guides
users to qualified medical professionals where appropriate.
Although our findings are promising, we acknowledge several
limitations of our research. Even though we have a user identifier,
it may not actually be a single user who is performing the searches, especially for shared machines. We also did not filter out medical professionals’ search data, which is likely to differ from novices [5]. By focusing on a single onset condition for each user we
could not dive more deeply into key structural aspects of medical
concerns over time, such as transitions between concerns, or how
searching and browsing activity associated with common and less
common symptoms, benign versus serious disorders, etc. influences these transitions. The association between pre-onset behavior and the onset condition could also have been made clearer by
requiring that the onset condition occur within a time window of
initial searches for medical concerns; discarding users from our
analysis who did not meet this criterion. Also, we did not seek to
distinguish the behavior of people with (potentially inappropriate)
health anxieties and those wrestling with a diagnosed or yet to be
diagnosed serious illness. User attributes, such as levels of health
anxiety [23], may influence search behavior. We studied interruptions and focus-of-attention at scale in a naturalistic setting, but
used limited definitions of each. More work is needed to refine
those definitions for more accurate detection of interruption, attention, and biases. Finally, we need to work with users directly,
in addition to their logs, to understand the medically-relevant
events in their lives (e.g., professional diagnoses or prognoses),
and study how those events affect their search behavior.

7. CONCLUSIONS
We presented a log-based longitudinal study of medical search
behavior on the Web. We characterized aspects of search behavior
and temporal changes in that behavior before the onset of a condition, and we showed that there are differences in behavior associated with the nature of the onset condition and the transition to
that condition from symptom searching. We also studied postonset behaviors and found evidence of interruption effects and
focus narrowing associated with the onset condition. Search engines could monitor long-term search behavior and provide support in advance of the onset or to lessen its impact on search behavior. To this end, we developed predictive models to accurately
estimate when concerns are likely to escalate and the impact that
their onset can have. Our findings support the development of
tailored support for medical search, to help those turning to the
Web for medical matters better manage their health seeking.

REFERENCES
[1] Asmundson, G.J.C., Taylor, S., and Cox, B.J. (2001). Health
Anxiety: Clinical and Research Perspectives on Hypochondriasis and Related Conditions. Wiley.

274

