Keynote Talk

Retrieving Information from the Book of Humanity:
The Personalized Medicine Data Tsunami
Crashes on the Beach of Jeopardy
Daniel R. Masys
Affiliate Professor
Biomedical and Health Informatics
University of Washington
Seattle, Washington
dmasys@u.washington.edu

Bio

Abstract

Dr. Daniel R. Masys is an Affiliate Professor of Biomedical and
Health Informatics in the Department of Biomedical Informatics
and Medical Education at the University of Washington, Seattle,
School of Medicine. Previously he served as Professor and Chair
of the Department of Biomedical Informatics and Professor of
Medicine at the Vanderbilt University School of Medicine. An
honors graduate of Princeton University and the Ohio State
University College of Medicine, he completed postgraduate
training in Internal Medicine, Hematology and Medical Oncology
at the University of California, San Diego, and the Naval
Regional Medical Center, San Diego. He served as Chief of the
International Cancer Research Data Bank of the National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, and was also Director of
the Lister Hill National Center for Biomedical Communications,
which is a computer research and development division of the
National Library of Medicine. He also served as Director of
Biomedical Informatics at the University of California, San Diego
School of Medicine, Director of the UCSD Human Research
Protections Program, and Professor of Medicine.

From a mute but eloquent alphabet of 4 characters emerges a
complex biological ‘literature’ whose highest expression is human
existence. The rapidly advancing technologies of ‘nextgen
sequencing’ will soon make it possible to inexpensively acquire
and store the characters of our complete personal genetic
instruction set and make it available for health assessment and
disease management. This uniquely personal form of ‘big data’
brings with it challenges that will be discussed in this keynote
presentation. Topics will include a brief introduction to the
linguistic challenges of ‘biology as literature’, the impact of
personal molecular variation on traditional approaches to disease
prevention, diagnosis and treatment, and the challenges of
information retrieval when a large volume of primary
observations is made that is associated with an evanescent and
rapidly changing corpus of scientific interpretation of those
primary observations. Experience with extracting high quality
pheonotypes from electronic medical records has shown that
Natural Language Processing capability is an essential
information extraction function for correlation of clinical events
with personal genetic variation. Any powerful set of information
can be used or misused, and put those who depend upon it in
jeopardy. These issues, and a lesson from the long running
Jeopardy TV series, will be discussed.

Dr. Masys is an elected member of the Institute of Medicine of
the National Academy of Sciences. He is a Diplomate of the
American Board of Internal Medicine in Medicine, Hematology,
and Medical Oncology. He is a Fellow of the American College
of Physicians, and Fellow and Past President of the American
College of Medical Informatics. His research interests include
development of informatics infrastructure for conducting clinical
and translational research, genome-phenome correlation using
phenotype data derived from electronic medical records data, and
approaches to incorporating genomic data effectively into clinical
systems.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
J.3 [Life and Medical Sciences] Biology and Genetics, Medical
Information Systems, H.3.1 [Content Analysis and Indexing]
Linguistic Processing

General Terms
Algorithms, Management, Languages, Theory

Keywords
Human genome, personalized medicine, genotypes, phenotypes.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

3

