Placing Images on the World Map: A Microblog-based
Enrichment Approach
Claudia Hauff∗

Geert-Jan Houben

Delft University of Technology
Delft, The Netherlands

Delft University of Technology
Delft, The Netherlands

c.hauff@tudelft.nl

g.j.p.m.houben@tudelft.nl
to platforms such as Flickr1 do not contain GPS-based latitude/longitude coordinates. Placing those images on a world
map by obtaining geographic information is not only important to aid people in the browsing and organizing of their
personal image archives, but it also plays a role in application scenarios for large geographically tagged image corpora
such as the automatic illustration of travelogues [16] and
personalized travel recommendations [6, 7, 8].
While GPS-enabled cameras are beginning to reach the
mainstream market (where an image’s latitude/longitude
coordinates are automatically recorded as meta-data), this
technology is not yet in widespread use. As an example,
consider the test set of images we crawled from the photo
sharing platform Flickr to test our hypotheses. Of the images that were taken within the last year, more speciﬁcally
between November 2010 and September 2011, only twenty
percent are geo-tagged- since Flickr allows users to manually add geo-information to images after uploading them,
this number can be considered as an upper bound to the use
of GPS-enabled devices in our data set.
Thus, there are vast amounts of images which are not geographically tagged. A number of approaches, e.g. [21, 22,
23, 13], have been developed that estimate the geographic
location of images based either on the textual meta-data
that is available for each image (most often the tags that
users assign to images), the visual features derived from the
image itself, or a combination of the two. These works exploit the very popular image sharing and organizing platform Flickr which we consider here as well. While to our
knowledge the existing approaches only consider information derived directly from elements within Flickr (the image itself or meta-data attached to the image), we look beyond this single platform and investigate if location estimation can be improved when considering traces of the image
owner/uploader on other social Web platforms. We consider
the exploitation of user traces across platforms an important
step forward, as a myriad of social Web platforms exist and
users are often active on a number of these.
In this work, we consider microblogs, and here more specifically we focus on the microblogging platform Twitter2 . We
hypothesize that we can improve the accuracy of the geographic location estimation when we not only consider the
tags the user has assigned to the image but when we also
consider the utterances the user has made on Twitter in
approximately the same time frame.

ABSTRACT
Estimating the geographic location of images is a task which
has received increasing attention recently. Large numbers of
images uploaded to platforms such as Flickr do not contain
GPS-based latitude/longitude coordinates. Obtaining such
geographic information is beneﬁcial for a variety of applications including travelogues, visual place descriptions and
personalized travel recommendations. While most works in
this area only exploit an image’s textual meta-data (tags,
title, etc.) to estimate at what geographic location the image was taken, we consider an additional textual dimension:
the image owner’s traces on the social Web. Speciﬁcally,
we hypothesize that information extracted from a person’s
microblog stream(s) can be utilized to improve the accuracy
with which the geographic location of the images is estimated. In this paper, we investigate this hypothesis on the
example of Twitter streams and ﬁnd it to be conﬁrmed. The
median error distance in kilometres decreases by up to 67%
in comparison to existing state-of-the-art. The best results
are achieved when tweets that were posted up to two days
before and after an image was taken are considered. Moreover, we also ﬁnd another type of additional information
useful: population density data.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.3.3 Information
Storage and Retrieval: Information Search and Retrieval
General Terms: Human Factors, Experimentation
Keywords: image location estimation, image placing

1.

INTRODUCTION

Estimating the geographic location of images (also referred to as geotagging, georeferencing or image placement
on the world map) is a task which has received increasing
attention in recent years. Large numbers of images uploaded
∗

This research has received funding from the European
Union Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013),
grant agreement no ICT 257831 (ImREAL project).

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
Copyright 2012 ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08 ...$15.00.

1

Flickr, http://www.flickr.com/
We chose Twitter as it is in wide-spread use around the
world.
2

691

Imagine a user Alice who for her holidays travelled to
North America for a week in the summer. Alice visited
Vancouver and Seattle. Alice is also very active on the social Web, having among others a Flickr and a Twitter account which she uses regularly to stay in touch with friends
and family. She later uploads the pictures she took during
the trip to Flickr. Instead of tagging every single picture
with the correct name of the town or monument visited,
to safe time, Alice decides to use the same set of tags for
all images that describe the entire holiday {northamerica,
seattle, vancouver, holiday}. During the holiday, Alice regularly tweeted about what she was doing and where she was
going, e.g.:
− “Vancouver this weekend :)”
− “Day 1 in Seattle - Been to the Space Needle. Sunny day.”
− “Sitting in a cafe in Georgetown drinking wine with friends.”
Since posts on Twitter are always time-stamped, we can easily determine which tweets Alice posted around the time of
a particular image being taken (information that is readily available for images). We hypothesize that such tweets,
where a user mentions place names, particular shops or monuments she has visited or is planning to visit, can improve
the accuracy of the location estimation process. Eventually,
our goal is the development of a framework, that automatically estimates latitude/longitude of each image, based on
the image tags Alice provided and the traces Alice left on
the social Web. Since various applications, that rely on geographically tagged images are beneﬁcial to the end user
(Alice), we expect Alice to provide her online personas and
user names willingly.
In this paper, we formulate and investigate the hypothesis
that a user’s traces on Twitter can increase the accuracy of
the image location estimation process. In particular, in this
work we make the following contributions:
• We developed an extension to an existing state-of-the-art
tag-based approach to location estimation [21] which is
based on the language modeling framework for information retrieval. Our extension makes it possible to exploit
the information extracted from the user’s tweets in a natural way.
• We show that exploiting a user’s Twitter stream when
estimating the location an image was taken at decreases
the median error distance by up to 67%. We also ﬁnd that
the best results are obtained when tweets within two days
before and after the image was taken are exploited.
• We ﬁnd that images, which have fewer than two tags with
a geographic scope (see Sec. 3.1.1) assigned to them, beneﬁt the most from our cross-system approach. In our experiments, the median error distance decreases by 40%
(57%) for images without tags (with one tag) when the
user’s Twitter stream is employed as alternative source of
information.
• Lastly, we also performed an investigation into the added
value of using non-uniform priors in the language modeling approach. We utilized prior information about the
population density and the climate. Our results show that
a prior based on population density also improves the accuracy of the location estimation.
In the remainder of this paper we ﬁrst outline previous
research (Sec. 2) in the areas of image location estimation
and users’ motives for using Twitter. The methodology of
our approach is presented in Sec. 3. The experimental setup

and the data sets used are described in Sec. 4, followed by
the results and their discussion in Sec. 5. We conclude the
paper in Sec. 6 and outline some avenues for future work.

2. RELATED WORK
Approaches proposed to solve the task of placing images
on the world map by determining their latitude and longitude, have been relying on a variety of sources that are based
on the image and its meta-data, the user uploading the image or external knowledge bases. Textual features exploited
from the image are mostly the assigned tags and the title as
well as the description. Visual features derived from the images include a variety of types, such as color histograms or
edge histograms [17]. Since photo sharing platforms such as
Flickr contain a social network component as well, it is also
possible to exploit such information by for example considering the friends of a user or the location of the users commenting on an image. Finally, external knowledge bases, in
particular gazetteers (geographic dictionaries), may also be
utilized in this task to classify terms as either being geographic in scope or not.
In [21] the tags assigned to images on Flickr are exploited.
A grid is placed over the world map which results in equally
sized cells. Each training image (with known location) is
assigned to its correct grid cell. For each cell, a language
model is created from the tags assigned by the user, and a
test image is assigned to the geographic cell that produces
the highest probability for generating the image’s tag set.
In contrast to our approach, the cells are of ﬁxed size, which
may not be optimal as some regions (e.g., large cities such
as London and Paris) will have a larger density of pictures
than relatively remote places. We use dynamically sized grid
cells, to account for these diﬀerences. To determine whether
a tag is geographic in nature, in [21] GeoNames3 is exmployed, a large gazetteer of geographic entities. Speﬁcically,
the weights of tags that appear in the English part of GeoNames are boosted.
Also based on tags is the approach proposed in [22]. In
contrast to [21], the location estimation is performed on
diﬀerent levels of granularity (city granularity, street level
granularity, etc.) and the evidence obtained over the different granularities is combined in order to output the best
match granularity location estimate. The authors evaluate
their approach by creating a data set with 54 distinct locations (cities in Europe) and classifying test images according
to the city they were taken in. This setup is more restricted
than the one we investigate in this paper: we attempt to
place test images as closely to their true geographic location
as possible; we are not restricted by a set of classes.
Instead of determining the correct grid cell and returning
the latitude/longitude of the cell’s center, a text-based twostep approach is proposed in [23]: ﬁrst, the most likely area
is found by a language modeling approach and within the
found cell, the best match images are determined by a similarity search. A test image with unknown location is then
assigned the location found by interpolating the locations of
the most similar images.
An approach that not only exploits textual information
but also visual features was proposed in [13]. Here, textual
information (tags) is the primary source of information, and
visual features are used as fall-back option in instances where
3

692

GeoNames, http://www.geonames.org/

form approaches that rely mainly on visual features. Here,
we investigate two additional sources of information: (i) the
image owner’s traces on the microblogging platform Twitter, and, (ii) prior information about the world, in particular population density and climate. We investigate two
hypotheses with our experiments:
• In cases where little (or no) textual meta-data is available
for an image, considering a user’s tweets as a source of
additional textual information will improve the accuracy
of the location estimation.
• Adding world knowledge as prior information will improve
the estimation accuracy.

tags do not provide meaningful information. The approach
works in diﬀerent stages: ﬁrst, the image tags are evaluated
for the occurrence of at least one known geographic location
(geographic lookup). If no location is found, PLSA [10] is
performed on the tag data of the corpus. A failure here
results in the exploitation of visual features which are used
as input to a support-vector machine based classiﬁer.
Georeferencing has not only been applied to images or
videos. It has also been utilized to determine the geo-location
of the subjects of Wikipedia articles (e.g. [25]) and the geolocation of Twitter messages as well as the respective home
location of Twitter users [14, 4]. In [4] it was found that
for 51% of Twitter users their home location on the city
level could be identiﬁed within 161 kilometres (100 miles)
of their true location. Based on a large training corpus of
Twitter message, the authors trained models (term distributions) for a large number of cities in the USA. While this
approach yields one location per user, we are concerned in
our work with estimating one location per item (in our case
an item is an image).
Finally, we also note a number of works that have considered the questions of why people use Twitter and what
they tweet about. Java et al. [12] developed a number of
tweet categories: daily chatter (most common use of Twitter), shared information and hyperlinks, conversations and
news. In [18] the majority of users (80%) were found to focus on themselves in their tweets, while only a minority of
users are driven by the sharing of information. Lastly, Zhao
et al. [28] conducted interviews asking users about their motivations for using Twitter; several major reasons surfaced
including keeping in touch with friends and colleagues and
collecting useful information for one’s work and spare time.
Overall, these studies show that a lot of tweets are concerned
with the user herself; we hypothesize that among these usercentred tweets, there are also useful ones for the derivation
of the location of images that were taken by the user.
Our method is similar in spirit to the just described tagbased image location estimation approaches; diﬀerences are
pointed out in detail in Sec. 3. We would like to stress that
in this paper our main focus is on the question of whether
a user’s traces on the social Web platform Twitter can offer valuable information for the image location estimation
task. Such cross-system exploitations have recently begun
to attract interest in a number of applications, e.g., [1, 3,
11]. In [1] for example, it has been investigated how users
use tags on diﬀerent social Web platforms (Flickr, Twitter
and Delicious) in the context of personalized tag and resource recommendation. It was found that a cross-platform
approach can lead to a considerable improvement of the recommendation quality.
In a preliminary study [9] we investigated the research
question posed here on a very small data set in a coarse
setup: we utilized the most recent tweets and most recent
images (instead of aligning tweets and images according to
publishing dates) in an oracle setting (instead of an automatic setup to combine both information sources) and found
ﬁrst evidence that this combination improves the image location estimation quality.

3.

We ﬁrst outline the baseline approach, which is grounded
in the language modeling approach to information retrieval
and then we turn to describing our proposed extensions.

3.1 Baseline Approach: World Regions as Language Models
Our baseline approach, which is a state-of-the-art approach
we compare our Twitter-based extension against, draws inspiration from a number of recently published works. Following [21], we employ the language modeling approach to
information retrieval [19, 15, 27, 26]. Instead of documents
and queries though as in retrieval, we deal with world regions and image tags. A language model θR , which in the
retrieval setting is derived for each document, is derived for
each region R of the world. Given a test image  with
tags T = {t1 , ..., tn } and unknown latitude/longitude, the
tags are considered as query terms and the region language
models are ranked with respect to the probability P (θR |T ),
which according to the Bayes theorem can be expressed as:
P (T |θR )P (θR )
P (T )

∝ P (θR )
P (ti |θR ).

P (θR |T ) =

(1)
(2)

ti ∈T

This is the standard query likelihood based language modeling setup which assumes term independence. Usually, the
prior probability of a region P (θR ) is considered to be uniform, that is, each region in the world is equally likely. The
language models are multinomial probability distributions
over the textual meta-data of all training images that were
taken in region R, that is, the textual information of all
these images is concatenated and treated analogously to a
single document.
Since a maximum likelihood estimate of P (ti |θR ) would
result in a zero probability of any region that misses one or
more of the tags in T , the estimate is usually smoothed with
a background language model, generated over all documents
in the training corpus. In accordance with [21], we found
Dirichlet smoothing [26] to yield the most accurate results
when evaluated on our data:
P (ti |θR ) =

c(ti , R) + μP (ti |θC )
.
|R| + μ

(3)

Here, μ is the smoothing parameter, c(ti , R) is the count
of tag ti in R and |R| is the length of the region document
(derived by concatenating all tags of all training images in
the region). The probability P (ti |θC ) is the maximum likelihood probability of tag ti occurring in the collection lan-

METHODOLOGY

Previous works have shown that geographic location estimation approaches exploiting textual meta-data provided
by the image owner (such as image tags, title, etc.), outper-

693

guage model θC (derived by concatenating all region documents).
Having identiﬁed the most likely region θR given test image  is only the ﬁrst step, as such regions often cover hundreds of kilometres and simply assigning the center of the
region as estimated latitude/longitude to image  is not sufﬁcient. Thus, similar to [23], in a second step we only consider the training images occurring within R. A language
model is generated for each of these training images, which
are then ranked according to their probability of generating
T . The latitude/longitude of the top ranked training image
within R is assigned to test image .
In contrast to [21], we do not partition the world map
into regions (or cells) of ﬁxed size. Instead, we found cells
of varying size to yield more accurate results: starting with
a grid cell that spans the entire world map (if viewed as
a graph, this cell is the root node), the training items are
added to the cell one at a time. Once the number of items
in a cell exceeds the set limit split , the cell is split into four
equally sized cells, each covering a quarter of the original
cell (four children nodes are added) and the training items
are re-distributed to these cells. To avoid too many splits
in areas where large amounts of training data are available,
a cell may not be split any further if its latitude/longitude
range reaches a lower limit lat lng . This process yields cells
of small size in areas where the training data is dense, and
cells of large size in areas where the training data is sparse
(e.g. regions covering oceans).
If a test image  contains no textual elements (or all
terms were removed during the ﬁltering steps described in
Sec. 3.1.1), the terms in the user location are used instead,
which has been proposed in [5]: if a user does not tag an uploaded item with its location, it may have been taken at the
user’s home location. In contrast to [5], we add the user location terms to , instead of relying on an external resource
to convert the user location to geographic coordinates which
is also often inaccurate due to the ambiguity of place names.
Finally, if none of these steps yield a non-empty set T , the
test image is assigned the latitude/longitude coordinates of
the most frequently occurring location in the training data.

cover a wide area) and the number of non-zero connected
components are determined. This score is normalized by
the maximum count. Thus, the smaller the score, the more
localized ti occurs in the training data. While yielding comparable results, our approach is considerably simpler than
the χ2 feature selection based geo-term ﬁltering [23], which
determines the geographic score for the tags in each cell separately.

3.2 Adding Additional Knowledge
We consider the language model approach with user-based
and geographic spread ﬁltering as our baseline and attempt
to improve upon it by relying on additional sources of information. When considering Equation 1, additional information can be added in this framework in three ways:
• The set of terms T : The bag-of-words that describe
an image can be extended by not only including the tags
that are assigned to image , but by also including terms
from the user’s traces on the social Web, in particular the
user’s Twitter stream.
• The prior probability P (θR ): Instead of a uniform
prior probability, we include knowledge about the world
and, for instance, assign a higher prior probability to regions of high population density or regions of moderate
climate.
• The region language model θR : The language model
of a region R can be expanded by adding additional information, for example, information extracted from Wikipedia.
In the work presented here, we investigate the ﬁrst two
aspects, expanding the term set used for image location estimation and adding informative priors. We leave the third
aspect for future work. Discussed next are the usage of terms
extracted from a user’s tweets and the usage of informative
priors.

3.2.1 Terms Extracted from Tweets
The hypothesis we investigate in this work is that traces
a user leaves on Twitter can aid us in estimating the geographic location of the user’s images on Flickr. Location
estimation based on an image’s textual meta-data is based
on the assumption that a user who uploads an image or
video also spends some time on adding tags, possibly also a
title and a description. Not every user though has the time
or the patience to do this. In particular in instances where a
user adds no or just very little extra information, we expect
the user’s traces on Twitter to be valuable.
On Twitter, users post short messages (tweets) with up to
140 characters about anything they choose. They can be followed by other users and themselves follow users in order to
receive their tweets. Tweets can be directed (at @user ) and
tweets can contain hashtags (#sigir2012 or #portland )4 .
The microblogging service Twitter was chosen due to its
popularity and wide-spread use today. Given the date D
(day, month, year) a test image  was taken at, we extract the tweets by the user who posted the image to Flickr.
We consider only those tweets by the user that were posted
within d days of D. After the removal of URLs and user
names (@user ), we are left with a bag-of-words W = {w1 , ..., wn }.

3.1.1 User-Based and Geographic Spread Filtering
In exploratory experiments, we found two strategies that
ﬁlter terms from the test images’ tag sets T to lead to more
robust and considerably more accurate estimations. Firstly,
terms are removed from T that were utilized as tags by less
than U users in the training corpus, in line with [22], and
secondly, terms are removed that appear in many diﬀerent
geographic areas in the training data. Whether a term is
likely to have a geographic scope can either be determined
by matching the term against a geographical dictionary such
as GeoNames as done in [21] or by considering how localized
the term occurs in the training data. We follow the latter
approach here. For example, while in our training data the
term “sydney” occurs primarily in one particular region (the
area containing the location of Sydney, Australia), the term
“bowling” appears in many diﬀerent regions. This observation leads to a simple yet eﬀective ﬁltering method: given a
term ti whose spread is to be determined, a grid is placed
over the world map (1 degree latitude/longitude range per
cell) and the number of training items in the cell that contain ti are recorded. Neighbouring grid cells with a non-zero
count are merged (to avoid penalizing geographic terms that

4
We also note, that Twitter allows tweets to be geo-tagged
directly, though this feature is rarely enabled by users and
only available when using Twitter from certain devices.
In [4] only 0.42% of tweets were found to be geo-tagged.

694

The world regions are no longer only ranked according to
their probability of generating the image tags (Equation 2),
but also according to their probability of generating the twitter terms. In our implementation, we interpolate both scores
for the ﬁnal ranking of each world region. Formally:

#Training data (in total)
#Training data with acc. ≥ 11
#Terms (data with acc. ≥ 11)
#Unique terms (data with acc. ≥ 11)

Table 1: Overview of training data.

P (θR |T , W ) ∝ P (θR )×
(4)
⎞
⎛


⎝λ
P (ti |θR ) + (1 − λ)
P (wi |θR )⎠
ti ∈T

month the image was taken. We then ﬁtted a Weibull distribution[24]6 to the data; this resulted in a prior which, given
the climate (av. temperature) in a region R at month m
returns the prior probability of an image being taken in R.

wi ∈W

(5)
Both, P (ti |θR ) and P (wi |θR ) are determined according to
Equation 3. This interpolation approach naturally includes
the original image-tag only approach when the parameter λ
is set to λ = 1.0. Conversely, at λ = 0.0, the image tags of
an image are ignored an only the terms extracted from the
user’s tweets are used to estimate P (θR |T , W ).
We chose this interpolation approach due to its simplicity. More elaborate combinations of image tags and tweet
terms will be investigated in future work. Note that the
term ﬁltering steps (Sec. 3.1.1), if employed, are now not
only performed on terms T but also on W . This means
eﬀectively, that only a small number of terms that originate
from a user’s Twitter stream will be included in W .

4. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
In Sec. 4.1 we ﬁrst describe the training data and the
setting of the parameters used to derive the language models
of the world regions. Then, in Sec. 4.2 we introduce our
methodology for deriving the test images and the Twitter
messages belonging to the users who uploaded these images.

4.1 Training Data
We rely on a publicly available Flickr data set for training:
the MediaEval 2011 Placing Task data set [20]. The MediaEval Placing Task data set is a benchmark that tackles the
same question we address in this work, namely the estimation of the geographic location of an uploaded Flickr item.
It consists of approximately 3.2 million Flickr images and
10, 000 Flickr videos. Meta-data is provided for all training
images and videos, including their geo-location as well as
the accuracy with which they were geo-tagged. There are
16 accuracy levels, ranging from 1 (world level) to 16 (street
level). We utilize all training items with accuracy 11 (city
level) or higher. We indexed7 all available tags (available for
the images and videos) and title terms (videos only). Each
image/video is considered to be a document and the tags and
title terms are considered to be the document’s content.
In preliminary experiments we found that an index which
is neither stemmed nor has stopwords removed yields the
best results. Table 1 provides the basic statistics of the
index created from the training data.

3.2.2 Region Priors
Instead of a uniform prior, we investigate two informative
priors, one based on population information and one based
on climate information.
In the case of the population based prior, which we base
on the population density of a region, we hypothesize that
images are more likely to be taken in areas of high population density than in areas of low population density. This
intuitively makes sense, we would expect that people take
more images in and around New York City than in the Great
Victoria Desert of Australia5 , simply because a greater number of people live or visit the former than the latter. Given
a set of places (towns, cities) ℘ = {p1 , p2 , .., pm } with their
geographic location and number of inhabitants (population
pop), for each region R, we sum up the population of all
places that are situated within R as well as of those places
that are situated within a distance of 100km (according to
the Haversine formula hs) of the region’s center Rc . To
avoid undue inﬂuence of major cities (with millions of inhabitants), we use the square root of the population. This
yields the following population prior (Z is the normalization
constant):
⎛
⎞
⎜
1
Ppop (θR ) =
× ⎜1 +
Z ⎝


p∈R∨
hs(p,Rc )≤100km

3,195,474
2,974,635
21,557,411
1,095,561

4.2 Test Data
Although the MediaEval benchmark also provides a test
set (a set of Flickr items for which to estimate their latitude/longitude), we created our own for two reasons:
• It is very diﬃcult to determine for arbitrary Flickr users
whether they have a Twitter account unless they provide
it in their Flickr user proﬁle.
• To investigate our approach, we need to consider a user’s
tweets for a substantial period of time as the average user
does not take photos every day. Due to the limits imposed
by the Twitter API, in our investigation we cannot for
an arbitrary Twitter user retrieve all the user’s tweets at
once, only the most recent ones are available.

⎟
popp ⎟
⎠.

As a second prior, we exploit climate data. Our assumption is that it is more likely that people live in or travel
to regions with a moderate climate than regions of extreme
weather conditions. We derived the climate prior by collecting a number of geo-tagged images and recording the average
temperature in the region where the image was taken at the

Taking the above limitations into account we derived our
test data by considering an existing long-term Twitter data
set (TWD) and ﬁnding matching Flickr accounts. In previous work [2] the TWD data set was created by monitoring

5
On February 11, 2012, a search on http://flickr.com
with the query “New York City” returned 3, 672, 535 results
while the query “Great Victoria Desert” returned 115 images.

6
We chose this distribution as empirically it yielded the best
ﬁt to the data.
7
For indexing and retrieval we utilized the Lemur Toolkit,
http://lemurproject.org/.

695

the tweets posted by 21, 102 users over a period of eleven
months (November 2010 to September 2011). Having access
to such a long term proﬁle of users suits our purposes very
well. The question then remains for us, how to determine
the Flickr accounts of these users (if they have one).
We approached this issue in two ways: (i) by performing
a crawl of the social Web aggregator site FriendFeed and
(ii) by manually assessing a subsets of the tweets posted by
these users.
First, we conducted a crawl of FriendFeed8 , a social Web
aggregator website, which allows users to create a uniﬁed
feed of the entries on the social Web across a multitude of
platforms including Twitter and Flickr. We started the extraction process with one highly connected FriendFeed user
and crawled the proﬁles of all his subscribers and subscriptions. This process was conducted recursively, until no further proﬁles were discovered. In total, we found 444, 226
proﬁles with at least one public entry in the feed. Of those
users, 14.69% have listed in their proﬁles (among others) at
least one Twitter and one Flickr account. We matched these
discovered FriendFeed users with a Twitter and Flickr account against the users in the TWD data set and found 131
FriendFeed proﬁles that listed one of the TWD Twitter accounts with at least 10 public tweets and 5 or more publicly
accessible images in their Flickr stream.
As a second strategy, we consider the tweets of the TWD
data set, accumulated within the ﬁrst ﬁve month of monitoring and extracted all tweets containing the string “ﬂickr.com”.
Our intuition is, that Twitter users who tweet a link to
Flickr, are likely to tweet about their own Flickr account.
Since this is an overly strong assumption, one of the paper’s
authors judged for each tweeted link whether it indeed links
to the user’s Flickr account. This could either be inferred
from the text (e.g.,“Check out the pics of my recent trip to
France”) or from the similarity of the Twitter proﬁle and
the Flickr proﬁle (same avatar image, the same or similar
user name, etc.). Among the tweets we found 3, 260 with
a “ﬂickr.com” string9 . After manually investigating them,
we found a total of 135 users in TWD that had tweeted
their Flickr account and had posted at least 10 tweets and
5 images to Flickr.
The proﬁles found through these two approaches have little overlap. In total, our test data set consists of 252 users
of whom we have recorded their Twitter as well as Flickr
account. For these 252 users, we have collected a total of
1, 892, 168 tweets over the eleven month period. From the
users’ Flickr accounts we collected a total of 153, 773 images,
after ﬁltering out batch uploads10 . Not all images were taken
within the eleven month time frame of our TWD data set
and not all images contain latitude/longitude values. Table 2 shows the split of the Flickr image data: there are
7, 477 images which were taken within the time frame and
have a latitude/longitude of suﬃcient accuracy. Since for
our evaluation we can only rely as ground truth on images
for which we have a geo-location, we used these 7477 images
as our test set of images.

#Non-batch images
of those:
#Images within Nov ’10-Sept ’11
#Images with latitude/longitude
#Images within Nov ’10-Sept ’11 &
latitude/longitude

153,773
27,879
30,951
7,477

Table 2: Flickr data set.

4.3 Parameter Settings & Runs
The following subsections describe the parameter settings
and runs we investigate. We tuned the parameters for our
experiments in a grid-search manner on the 5, 347 test items
that were provided for the MediaEval 2011 benchmark. There
is no overlap to our test set. We found the following parameter settings to yield the best results with respect to the
median distance error metric: indexing without stopword
removal and without stemming, Dirichlet smoothing with
μ = 10000, U = 2 (ﬁltering terms used by less than two
users in the training data), θgeo = 0.1 (ﬁltering terms with a
geo-spread score above 0.1), split = 5000 and lat lng = 0.01.
Apart from the geo-ﬁltering, these settings were ﬁxed in all
experiments reported in the result section. For the sake
of showing the inﬂuence of geographic scope ﬁltering, we
present results for both types: with geo-ﬁltering and without geo-ﬁltering.
In this setup, there are a total of 1786 non-empty world
regions. The maximum extent in terms of latitude and longitude are 22.5 and 45.0 degrees respectively, in areas of the
world map where the training data is extremely sparse. The
most frequently occurring location in the training data (2834
items) was found to be at latitude/longitude 40.7/−73.9
(New York City, USA).

Baselines. We report the results for two runs: BaseLinegeo
and BaseLine. The ﬁrst is our primary baseline (geographic
spread ﬁltering is employed), while in the latter case, the
terms in T are not geo-ﬁltered. In both cases, the mixture
parameter is λ = 1 (Equation 4), i.e. only the image tags
(T ) are utilized to estimate the images’ location.

Terms Extracted from Tweets. For the Twitter-based approach (Sec 3.2.1), we extract all tweets from a given user’s
Twitter stream that were posted ±d days within the day
the test image was taken on. For d = 0, we only consider tweets taken at the same day as the image’s creation
date and we label that run SameDay. We also tested d =
{1, 2, 3, 5, 10, 20, .., 50}. Due to space constraints we only report the results for d = {2, 10, 20, 50} (labelled ± 2 Days
for d = 2 and so on). Recall, that for instance d = 2 means
that tweets of a total of ﬁve days are considered: the two
days before the image was taken, the image creation date
day itself and the two following days.
The extracted tweets are pre-processed: re-tweets are removed (we consider them as useful for inferring something
about a user’s interests but not about a user’s travels or actions), URLs and @names are stripped. Apart from these
steps, no further processing is performed. In particular, to
align the Twitter-based W with our training data index, we
performed neither stemming nor did we remove stopwords.
If a user posts no tweets within the d days before/after the
image’s creation date, W will be empty.

8

FriendFeed, http://www.friendfeed.com/
Note, we did not expand shortened URLs such as bit.ly.
10
We consider a set of images by the same user as a batch,
if the images are identical in terms of assigned tags, the
date (day/month/year) they were taken, the hour they were
taken and the latitude and longitude.
9

696

BaseLinegeo
BaseLine

λ

GeoFilter

1km

10km

50km

100km

1000km

ME
km

1.0
1.0

yes
no

7.24%
7.46%

34.96%
27.87%

48.64%
34.87%

52.67%
36.32%

61.35%
42.29%

60.97
2513.15

With respect to BaseLinegeo
#Better
#Worse #Same

Δ

−
2521

km

= −1715

km

= −4800

km

= −1986

km

= −2045

km

= −4318

km

= −3573

Δ

km

−
3017

−
1939

252

6210

3051

1734

48

6969

4446

671

5611

309

742

4671

848

4449

1143

3979

1353

3655

1695

3320

959

3998

= +4941

Informative Priors
Population (Pop)
Population
Climate

1.0
1.0
1.0

yes
no
yes

7.10%
7.65%
7.25%

34.72%
28.25%
34.98%

48.40%
35.27%
48.54%

52.59%
36.55%
52.54%

70.43%
44.66%

62.17
2217.60

61.16%

60.97

Δ

Δ

Δ

1015
2692
460

Δ

Δ

Δ

km

km

km

= +248

= +5276

= +4783

Terms Extracted from Tweets Only
±2 Days
±2 Days

0.0
0.0

yes
no

4.25%
1.82%

16.91%
4.47%

25.21%
6.42%

28.97%
8.40%

41.78%
23.63%

1974.25
5717.71

Δ

Δ

2360

1557

Δ

Δ

km

km

= +5402

= +5836

Interpolation: Image Tags and Terms Extracted from Tweets
SameDay
±2 Days
±10 Days
±20 Days
±50 Days

0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8

yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

9.21%
9.03%
8.53%
8.31%
8.48%

37.68%
38.16%
36.83%
36.72%
36.39%

54.09%
54.66%
53.98%
53.64%
51.97%

59.32%
59.93%
59.26%
58.84%
56.91%

70.27%
71.18%
70.74%
70.75%
68.02%

22.04
20.13
23.36
27.34
33.97

Δ

Δ

Δ

Δ

Δ

2064

km

= −4180

km

= −4055

km

= −3678

km

= −3681

km

= −3368

2180
2355
2469
2464

Δ

Δ

Δ

Δ

Δ

km

km

km

km

km

= +2089

= +1914

= +1967

= +2001

= +2340

Combining Informative Priors with the Interpolation Approach
±2 Days+Pop

0.8

yes

9.00%

37.87%

54.59%

59.62%

75.98%

20.92

Δ

2520

km

= −4245

Δ

km

= +1756

Table 3: Overview of the results across diﬀerent setups. The column Geo-Filter indicates whether the
experiment was run on the geo-ﬁltered term set only (yes) or on all terms (no) from T and/or W . Column
2 contains the interpolation parameter λ. Three evaluation measures are reported: (i) the percentage of test
images within {1, 10, 50, 100, 1000}km of the ground truth location in columns 4-8, (ii) the median error (ME) in
kilometres in column 9, and, (iii) the number of test images that were located with better, worse or the same
accuracy (columns 10-12) as BaseLinegeo . For the test images with better/worse accuracy than BaseLinegeo ,
we provide the average change in error distance in kilometres Δkm - it is negative when the error decreases
and positive when the error increases. In total, the test set consists of 7477 images. In gray, improvements
over BaseLinegeo are shown for columns 4-9 (note that in column 9, a smaller error distance indicates a better
performance).
10◦ and 28◦ Celsius. The lowest and highest temperature
found were −38◦ and 37◦ Celsius respectively. Since the
Weibull distribution is only deﬁned for positive values, we
shifted the temperatures by +50 which resulted in a maximum likelihood ﬁt of the Weibull distribution with parameters λ = 68 and k = 9.578.

Two types of runs are investigated, those with mixture parameter λ = 0 (only information from the tweets is utilized
to estimate the image’s location) and those with 0 < λ < 1.
For the bulk of the interpolation experiments we set λ = 0.8.

Region Priors. For the population based region prior, labelled Population, we utilize population data available from
GeoNames11 . It contains an overview of the latitude, longitude and population numbers for a total of 113, 816 towns
and cities across the world (places with more than 1, 000 inhabitants). For the climate based region prior (labelled Climate), we collected 100, 000 geo-tagged images from Flickr
(no overlap with our training/test data) and determined the
average temperature in the region on the month the image
was taken by relying on global historical climate data available from the National Climatic Data Center12 . It provides
data from 7278 weather stations around the world. The majority of those images were taken at temperatures between

4.4 Evaluation Measures
The accuracy of estimating the geographic location of images is commonly evaluated by reporting the percentage of
test items whose estimated location is within a distance
of x kilometres (km) according to the Haversine formula
from the ground truth geographic location of the image. As
in [21, 23], we report the accuracy for diﬀerent ranges of
x: {1, 10, 50, 100, 1000}km. We also report the median error
distance (ME) in kilometres, that is, the error distance that
no more than half of the test items exceed.
Additionally, we introduce two more measurements: to offer a comparison to the primary baseline BaseLinegeo which
we attempt to improve upon, we report the number of test
images for which the adapted approach performed better
(i.e. the error distance decreased), worse (the error distance

11

The data is available at http://download.geonames.org/
export/dump/cities1000.zip, accessed 09/2011.
12
The data is available at ftp://ftp.ncdc.noaa.gov/pub/
data/ghcn/v3/, accessed 09/2011.

697

time period into account? We ﬁrst discuss a set of experiments where the information provided in the image tags was
ignored and only the terms extracted from the user’s Twitter stream is exploited, i.e., λ = 0. We report the results for
d = 2, as this setting resulted in the highest accuracy in our
experiments. We present the results both for runs with and
without geo-ﬁltering employed. When geo-ﬁltering is not
applied to W , the accuracy of the estimation is extremely
poor with a median error of 5718km. When geo-ﬁltering is
employed, the results improve, though the median error is
still high at 1974km compared to BaseLinegeo . These results
can be explained by the fact that users do not exclusively
tweet about their personal experiences and actions but may
also comment on news. We note, that again, there are test
images which beneﬁt from relying on Twitter information instead of image tags: 2360 test images have a lower error distance when using Twitter terms compared to BaseLinegeo .
While relying on Twitter alone to estimate an image’s
location overall does not yield an improved accuracy, the
information contained in a user’s Twitter stream is very
helpful when combined with the textual meta-data obtained
from the image. Consider the results that interpolate both
sources with λ = 0.8. Across a range of time periods, the
accuracy in all distance cut-oﬀs increases and the median error decreases with respect to BaseLinegeo . Overall, the best
setting is to consider tweets that were posted up to two days
before and after the time the image was taken at: at the 1km
cut-oﬀ, the accuracy improves from 7.2% to 9%, at 50km the
accuracy improves from 48.6% to 54.7% and at the 100km
cut-oﬀ the accuracy increases again from 52.7% to 59.9%.
The median error on the other hand decreases sharply from
61km to 20.1km. Including tweets from a wider time interval
(more than two days before and after the image was taken),
decreases the accuracy again, though the results are still
outperforming BaseLinegeo . When considering the split of
the test images into better/worse/same as BaseLinegeo , we
notice that the inclusion of a wider set of tweets increases
the number of test images that either beneﬁt or are harmed
by the inclusion of the Twitter data. This is to be expected,
since not all images had tweets that were posted within d
days of the time the image was taken.

increased) or exactly the same as the baseline. We also determine the average change in error distance in kilometres
(Δkm ) for the test items that perform better or worse than
BaseLinegeo . A positive change indicates that the error distance increases on average by Δkm kilometres, while a negative change indicates that the error distance decreases on
average by Δkm kilometres.

5.

RESULTS

We ﬁrst discuss the main results and then turn to investigation particular parameters and particular subsets of the
test images.
The main results of our experiments are reported in Table 3. For each run, the interpolation parameter is given
and it is indicated whether geographic spread based ﬁltering was employed. Shown in gray are improvements over
BaseLinegeo for the distance cut-oﬀ evaluation measures and
the median error.
To give an example of how to interpret the numbers, we
compare the two baselines now in detail: both, BaseLine and
BaseLinegeo neither include informative priors nor information derived from tweets (thus, λ = 1). When comparing
the results across the various distance cut-oﬀs, the inﬂuence
of the geo-spread ﬁltering on the accuracy becomes visible.
While at the 1km cut-oﬀ there is little diﬀerence between the
two runs, at the 50km cut-oﬀ already, BaseLinegeo outperforms BaseLine considerably with 48.6% accuracy compared
to 34.9% of BaseLine. The results are similar for the median error distance in kilometres: while for BaseLinegeo , the
median error is 61km, the median error increases to 2513km
for BaseLine. However, not all test images are estimated
with a greater accuracy when geo-ﬁltering is employed. In
fact, for 2521 test images BaseLine yields a more accurate
estimate than BaseLinegeo . Conversely, for 3017 test images, BaseLinegeo yields better estimation than BaseLine.
These numbers do not explain the big diﬀerence observed
in median error though; for this reason, we also report the
average change in error distance Δkm . For the 2521 test images, BaseLine outperforms BaseLinegeo , the error decreases
on average by 1715km, whereas for the 3017 test images
where BaseLine performs worse than BaseLinegeo , the error
increases by 4941km on average.

Combining Priors and Twitter Terms. Finally, we consider a combination of the well performing population density based prior and the best performing Twitter setup (d =
2, λ = 0.8). The result of this combination is shown in the
last row in Table 3. Recall, that we can only expect the
prior to inﬂuence the accuracy at the 1000km cut-oﬀ. The
results show that indeed at the 1000km cut-oﬀ using the informative prior increases the accuracy, from 71.2% (run ±2
Days) to 76%.
In Figure 1 we present an overview of the total number of
unique terms used to estimate the locations of the 7477 test
images. In case of BaseLine, for instance, all 5600 unique
terms found as tags within the test images are utilized,
whereas in the case of BaseLinegeo , 466 unique terms remain
after employing geo-ﬁltering. Shown is also the development
of including Twitter terms from various days: the vast majority of terms are considered to be non-geographic and thus
they do not play a role. The number of geographic terms for
instance for ±2 Days is 1983, compared with 41, 101 unique
terms that are not geographic in scope (this high number is
the result of neither employing stemming nor stopwording).

Informative Priors. Next, let us consider the impact of
the informative priors in Table 3. Since these priors are determined over regions (which may span hundreds of kilometres), we do not expect an impact in accuracy in the 1-100km
error distance cut-oﬀs. If we however consider the accuracy
within 1000km, the population based prior improves considerably over the baseline: while BaseLinegeo achieves 61.4%
accuracy, adding a population based prior yields 70.4% accuracy. For the 1015 test images that yield a decreased error
with this prior, the error distance decreases on average by
4800km, while for the 252 test images that yield a larger
error in this setup, the error distances increases on average
by only 248km. The climate prior on the other hand has
very little eﬀect overall. One reason could be, that monthly
average temperatures do not not provide a signal that is
ﬁne-grained enough.
Terms Extracted From Tweets. Let us now turn to the
main research question of this paper: can the accuracy of
estimating the geographic location of images be improved
when taking the user’s utterances on Twitter in the same

698

4

6
5.5

x 10

4

10

Baselinegeo

Terms used
Terms not used (filtered out)

+/− 2 Days λ=0.0
+/− 2 Days λ=0.8

5
3

10
Median Error in KM

4.5
4

#Terms

3.5
3

2

10

2.5
1

10

2
1.5
1

0

5600

10

0.5
466
0

BaseL i n e

1816

BaseL i n e geo

1983

Twi tter
S am eDay

Twi tter
+/ -2 D ays

2188

2240

Twi tter
Twi tter
+/ -10 Days +/ -2 0 Days

Twi tter
+/-50 Days

5.1 Interpolation Parameter λ
In the results just described, we had ﬁxed λ = 0.8 for
the interpolation experiments. We chose this value as it
gave robust results across a range of settings. Now, we only
consider the best performing setup (± 2 Days) and plot the
results when λ is varied from 0 (no Twitter information is
used) to 1 (no image information is used) in steps of 0.1. In
Figure 2 we show the development of the accuracy for 1km
and 50km. Please note that the two y-axes are on diﬀerent
scales: on the left (right), the results for the 1km (50km)
distance cut-oﬀ are shown. The horizontal lines indicate the
accuracies of BaseLinegeo (λ = 1) for both cut-oﬀs.
10%

Number of Tags. To investigate the impact of the number
of tags on the estimation accuracy, we plotted the median
error in kilometres for diﬀerent settings in Figure 3 for the
three cases of a test image having 0, 1 or 2 tags in T . Please
note, that the plot is on a logarithmic scale (y-axis) and that
we consider the size of T after having employed geographic
scope ﬁltering.
Let us ﬁrst focus on BaseLinegeo . As can be expected, if no
tags are present, the median error distance is highest (with
4142km), as either the most frequent location in the training
data is assigned to the test image or, if available, the user’s
home location is added to T . Since the given home location
may be geographically ambiguous (.e.g.,“Perth” may refer to
a city in Australia or the UK), underspeciﬁed (e.g.,“USA”)
or plainly inaccurate (e.g.,“Mars”), there is often little additional value in it. If one tag is available, the median error
distance decreases to 131km, at |T | = 2, the median error
has fallen to 11km. The interpolation approach ±2 Days
with λ = 0.8 improves over BaseLinegeo if T contains either zero or one tag only. At zero tags, the median error
distance decreases by 40%, for the test images with one tag,
the median error decreases by 57%.
For the cases where |T | ≥ 3, adding information from a
user’s Twitter stream does not yield any more improvement
in accuracy. This conﬁrms our original hypothesis: extracting terms from a user’s tweets is valuable for images which
contain less than three tags (after geographic ﬁltering).

60%

9%

55%

8%

50%

45%
BaseLine g e o
50km cutoﬀ

40%

5%

35%

4%

30%

3%

25%

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4
0.5
0.6
Interpolation Parameter λ

0.7

0.8

0.9

50KM Cutoff

1KM Cutoff

7%

2%
0

2 Tags (2930)

in T after applying geographic scope ﬁltering, and, (ii) the
distance of the image from the user’s home location.

1km cutoff
50km cutoff

BaseLine g e o
1km cutoﬀ

1 Tag (1783)

Figure 3: Test set split according to the number of
tags T after employing geo-ﬁltering. Compared are
BaseLinegeo (λ = 1), ±2 Days with λ = 0 and ±2 Days
with λ = 0.8. In brackets, the size of each partition
is shown.

Figure 1: Number of unique terms appearing in the
tags of the 7477 test images.

6%

0 Tags (1747)

2349

20%
1

Figure 2: Interpolation parameter λ varied from [0, 1]
in steps of 0.1. Results are shown for ±2 Days with
λ = 0.8 and geo-ﬁltering employed. Note, the y-axes
are on diﬀerent scales.

Distance to Home Location. In [4] it was found that a
user’s home location can be estimated based on the user’s
tweets. In our experiments we found that even if tweets from
a large number of days (±50) around the test images are
used to extract terms for W , the results still improve over
BaseLinegeo . One potential explanation is that this Twitter
based information enables us to mostly estimate those images, that are close to a user’s home location with greater accuracy. To evaluate this hypothesis we conducted the following analysis. We manually transcribed/disambiguated the
home location that the users who contributed the test images
gave on their Flickr proﬁle and description ﬁelds and converted them into latitude/longitude. For 4515 of the test images, we could determine the corresponding user’s home lo-

The increase in accuracy is similar for both evaluation
measures, at λ > 0.3 (1km cut-oﬀ) and at λ > 0.4 (50km
cut-oﬀ), the interpolation approach outperforms the baseline. For this particular setup, λ = 0.9 yields the most
accurate results with 55% of the test images being placed
within 50km of their true location (compared to 49% in
BaseLinegeo ).

5.2 What Images Benefit from W ?
Finally, we turn to the question of what images do (not)
beneﬁt from adding information from the user’s Twitter
stream. We consider two dimensions: (i) the number of tags

699

+/-2 Days, λ = 0.8 : error in KM

10,000
1,000

40% (57%) decrease in median error distance for images
without tags (with a single tag).
• We also investigated the value of informative priors in
the language modeling approach. The population density
prior improves the accuracy of the location estimation.

1km
10km
100km
1000km
>1000km

100
Ba seL i n e g e o

10 p erforms

These results leave a lot of potential for future work. One
possibility is to not only consider the traces a user leaves on
Twitter, but also on other social Web platform such as Facebook or LinkedIn. Another area of future work is to classify
users’ tweets as either being about personal experiences and
activities or about local vs. global news: tweets discussing
global news (e.g. “Japan announced meltdown yesterday; situation grim.”) are often adding noise for our purposes, while
tweets discussing local news (e.g. “Here in Toronto the police
made multiple arrests today”) are useful as they can serve
as indicators of the user’s home location. Lastly, we also
consider an investigation into the similarities/diﬀerences between (estimated) travel patterns of diﬀerent users and user
groups an interesting avenue of further work.

b etter th an
+/ -2 Days

1 wi th λ = 0. 8
Ba seL i n e g e o p erforms worse
th an +/ -2 Days wi th λ = 0. 8

0.1
0.1

1

10
100
BaseLine g e o : error in KM

1,000

10,000

Figure 4: Scatter plot with test data split according to the distance, the images were taken at with
respect to the corresponding user’s home location.
Each marker stands for one image.
cation with city level accuracy. We then removed all images
where BaseLine geo and the run ±2 Days (λ = 0.8) yield the
same error distance. The remaining 1330 images were partitioned according to how far away from the user’s home location they were taken: within {1, 10, 100, 1000, > 1000}km
of the user’s home location.
In Figure 4 we show a scatter plot for these 1330 images:
the error in kilometres at BaseLinegeo vs. the error at ±2
Days (λ = 0.8). The images belonging to each partition are
marked with diﬀerent markers/colors. Many images were
taken within 100km of the respective users’ home location.
While for these types of images, adding information from
a user’s Twitter stream sometimes improves and sometimes
decreases the error, a clearer pictures emerges for images
that were taken a greater distance from the user’s home
location: the the vast majority of images improve when utilizing information extracted from Twitter.

6.

7.[1] F.REFERENCES
Abel, S. Araújo, Q. Gao, and G.-J. Houben. Analyzing cross-system
user modeling on the social web. In ICWE ’11, pages 28–43, 2011.
[2] F. Abel, Q. Gao, G.-J. Houben, and K. Tao. Analyzing user modeling on
Twitter for personalized news recommendations. In UMAP ’11, pages 1–12,
2011.
[3] F. Abel, N. Henze, E. Herder, and D. Krause. Interweaving public user
profiles on the web. In UMAP ’10, pages 16–27, 2010.
[4] Z. Cheng, J. Caverlee, and K. Lee. You are where you tweet: a
content-based approach to geo-locating twitter users. In CIKM ’10, pages
759–768, 2010.
[5] J. Choi, A. Janin, and G. Friedland. The 2010 ICSI Video Location
Estimation System. In MediaEval 2010 Workshop, 2010.
[6] M. Clements, P. Serdyukov, A. P. de Vries, and M. J. T. Reinders. Finding
wormholes with flickr geotags. In ECIR ’10, pages 658–661, 2010.
[7] M. Clements, P. Serdyukov, A. P. de Vries, and M. J. T. Reinders. Using
flickr geotags to predict user travel behaviour. In SIGIR ’10, pages
851–852, 2010.
[8] M. De Choudhury, M. Feldman, S. Amer-Yahia, N. Golbandi, R. Lempel,
and C. Yu. Automatic construction of travel itineraries using social
breadcrumbs. In HT ’10, pages 35–44, 2010.
[9] C. Hauff and G.-J. Houben. Geo-location estimation of flickr images:
Social web based enrichment. In ECIR ’12, pages 85–96, 2012.
[10] T. Hofmann. Probabilistic latent semantic analysis. In UAI âĂŹ99, pages
289–296, 1999.
[11] T. Iofciu, P. Fankhauser, F. Abel, and K. Bischoff. Identifying users across
social tagging systems. In ICWSM ’11, 2011.
[12] A. Java, X. Song, T. Finin, and B. Tseng. Why we twitter: understanding
microblogging usage and communities. In 9th WebKDD / 1st SNA-KDD 2007
Workshop on Web mining and Social Network Analysis, pages 56–65, 2007.
[13] P. Kelm, S. Schmiedeke, and T. Sikora. Multi-modal, multi-resource
methods for placing flickr videos on the map. In ICMR ’11, pages
52:1–52:8, 2011.
[14] S. Kinsella, V. Murdock, and N. OHare. ”i’m eating a sandwich in
glasgow”: Modeling locations with tweets. In SMUC ’11, pages 759–768,
2011.
[15] V. Lavrenko and W. B. Croft. Relevance based language models. In SIGIR
’01, pages 120–127, 2001.
[16] X. Lu, Y. Pang, Q. Hao, and L. Zhang. Visualizing textual travelogue with
location-relevant images. In LBSN ’09, pages 65–68, 2009.
[17] M. Lux and S. A. Chatzichristofis. Lire: lucene image retrieval: an
extensible java cbir library. In MM ’08, pages 1085–1088, 2008.
[18] M. Naaman, J. Boase, and C.-H. Lai. Is it really about me?: message
content in social awareness streams. In CSCW ’10, pages 189–192, 2010.
[19] J. Ponte and W. B. Croft. A language modeling approach to information
retrieval. In SIGIR ’98, pages 275–281, 1998.
[20] A. Rae, V. Murdock, P. Serdyukov, and P. Kelm. Working Notes for the
Placing Task at MediaEval 2011. In MediaEval 2011 Workshop, 2011.
[21] P. Serdyukov, V. Murdock, and R. van Zwol. Placing flickr photos on a
map. In SIGIR ’09, pages 484–491, 2009.
[22] O. Van Laere, S. Schockaert, and B. Dhoedt. Combining multi-resolution
evidence for georeferencing Flickr images. In SUM ’10, pages 347–360, 2010.
[23] O. Van Laere, S. Schockaert, and B. Dhoedt. Finding locations of flickr
resources using language models and similarity search. In ICMR ’11, pages
48:1–48:8, 2011.
[24] W. Weibull. A statistical distribution function of wide applicability. J.
Appl. Mech.-Trans. ASME, 18(3):293–297, 1951.
[25] B. P. Wing and J. Baldridge. Simple supervised document geolocation
with geodesic grids. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies - Volume 1, pages
955–964, 2011.
[26] C. Zhai and J. Lafferty. A study of smoothing methods for language
models applied to ad hoc information retrieval. In SIGIR ’01, pages
334–342, 2001.
[27] C. Zhai and J. Lafferty. Two-stage language models for information
retrieval. In SIGIR ’02, pages 49–56, 2002.
[28] D. Zhao and M. B. Rosson. How and why people twitter: the role that
micro-blogging plays in informal communication at work. In GROUP ’09,
pages 243–252, 2009.

CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we have presented an approach to image location estimation that exploits a user’s traces on the social
Web across platforms. We hypothesized that information
extracted from a person’s Twitter stream can be utilized
to improve the accuracy of the image location estimation.
Our investigation was motivated by the fact that people often tweet about themselves, and it is likely that they post
messages which refer to their activities or travels. Furthermore, we investigated the usage of informative priors, based
on population data and on climate data. We developed an
extension to an existing state-of-the-art tag-based approach
to location estimation [21] which is based on the language
modeling framework for information retrieval. Our extension makes it possible to exploit the information extracted
from the user’s tweets in a natural way. In this work, we
presented a number of ﬁndings:
• Exploiting a person’s Twitter stream when estimating the
location of an image decreases the median error distance
by up to 67% in comparison to a state-of-the-art approach.
The best results are obtained when tweets within two days
before and after the image was taken are exploited.
• Images, that were assigned less than two tags after geographic scope ﬁltering (Sec. 3.1.1), beneﬁt the most from
terms extracted from Twitter. Speciﬁcally, we showed a

700

