A Knowledge-based Approach for Summarising Opinions
Marco Bonzanini
Queen Mary University of London

marcob@eecs.qmul.ac.uk

ABSTRACT

of the advantages of such a knowledge representation consists in
the possibility of augmenting the knowledge through its integration
with external knowledge bases. Resources like WordNet1 , DBpedia2 or other domain-specific ontologies can be exploited for this
purpose. In feature-based sentiment analysis, a knowledge-based
approach is particularly suitable, as the description of complex domains can benefit from the knowledge representation. Complex objects made of different components and attributes can be described
in the knowledge base, and linked to opinion terms and phrases. We
view knowledge-based summarisation as a key technology, since it
enables reasoning over retrieval results. Entity summarisation is
a further application of this technology, as the knowledge about a
specific entity can be used to create entity profiles.
A knowledge-based approach to summarisation can be exploited to
produce personalised summaries. In the multi-document context,
a user can be interested in a specific aspect of topic. For example, given a set of reviews of a movie, the user might want to read
all the comments about a specific actor. This can be also extended
for multiple topics. The generation of personalised summaries can
be triggered explicitly, i.e. through a specific query, or it can take
advantage of a user profile. A user model can be based on explicit keywords selected by the user, or on implicit feedback. A
user-oriented study is needed to test the efficacy of a personalised
summarisation system.

The popularity of on-line resources, which allow users to review
products or services, is motivating new interest in the area of Sentiment Analysis [3]. An important task is the classification of documents according to the overall sentiment, i.e. whether positive or
negative. A common behaviour among reviewers is to summarise
the overall sentiment of the review in a single sentence, or in a
short passage. On the other hand, the rest of the review can express
a feeling which is different from the overall judgement. This can
be explained by the presence of several aspects or features that the
reviewers want to comment on. Traditional summarisation techniques [2] are not always suitable for building opinion-based summaries, and more sentiment-oriented approaches are needed. In
this research, we investigate the use of summarisation techniques
applied to reviews, and we propose a knowledge-based approach to
summarisation, in the context of sentiment analysis. The proposed
research is focused on three different aspects.
Firstly, we investigate the use of summarisation techniques for sentiment classification. Capturing the key passage of a review can
be beneficial for both a sentiment classifier, and for a user who
could understand the polarity of a review without reading the full
text. Secondly, we investigate how to combine knowledge extracted
from the reviews or integrated from external sources, with the
purpose of producing opinion-oriented summaries. A knowledgebased approach enables to build aspect-based summaries, i.e. summaries which are focused on a specific aspect of the item under
analysis. Thirdly, we analyse the possibility of generating personalised (user-oriented or query-biased) opinion-based summaries.
Knowledge extraction tools can be used in order to generate classifications and relationships. Given a representation of a document consisting of the terms, classifications, and relationships extracted from the genuine document, the question is how to generate a summary from the knowledge-based representation. We view
term, classification and relationships as propositions. In traditional
knowledge-based representations, only classifications and relationships are considered. A proposition-context-based representation
that combines terms, classifications, and relationships is proposed
in [1]. Sentiment adds an extra dimension to this representation.
For example, in the sentence “Maximus is a brave general”, the
term “brave” is expressing a positive polarity on the class, while
in the sentence “Peter is a good friend of Mary” the sentiment is
related to the relationship. In a knowledge-oriented approach the
sentiment dimension would be inferred to the correct class, leading
to the understanding of the sentiment carried by the review. One

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.m [Information Search and Retrieval]: Miscellaneous

General Terms
Design, Experimentation

Keywords
Summarisation, Sentiment Analysis, Knowledge Extraction

1.

REFERENCES

[1] N. Fuhr, N. Goevert, and T. Roelleke. Dolores: A system for
logic-based retrieval of multimedia objects. In SIGIR, pages
257–265, 1998.
[2] A. Nenkova and K. McKeown. Automatic summarization.
Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval,
5(2-3):103–233, 2011.
[3] B. Pang and L. Lee. Opinion mining and sentiment analysis.
Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval,
2(1-2):1–135, 2008.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

1
2

991

http://wordnet.princeton.edu/wordnet/
http://dbpedia.org

