Adversarial Content Manipulation Effects
Fiana Raiber

Faculty of Industrial Engineering and Management
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa 32000, Israel

fiana@tx.technion.ac.il

ABSTRACT
We address a question that has been somewhat overlooked
throughout the transition from classical ad hoc retrieval to
Web search: how is the performance of classical retrieval approaches affected by the presence of content manipulation?
Our initial experiments have shown that the relative performance patterns of some classical retrieval strategies might
change in the transition from non-manipulated to manipulated corpora. A natural future venue to explore is how to
mix these strategies and make (some of) them more robust
under presumed content manipulation conditions.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.3.3 [Information Search
and Retrieval]: Retrieval models
General Terms: Algorithms, Experimentation
Keywords: ad hoc retrieval, keyword stuffing, content manipulation, cluster-based retrieval, passage-based retrieval

1.

INTRODUCTION

Classical ad hoc (query-based) retrieval approaches focus on the document content for determining relevance to
queries. On the other hand, the abundance of information over the Web has driven the utilization of additional
information sources such as anchor text [9] and hyperlink
structure [2]. Such information sources can potentially help
search engines to cope, for example, with the adversarial nature of Web search. That is, the fact that some Web-page
creators manipulate the content of pages so as to have them
ranked high in response to popular queries, even if the pages
do not pertain to the expressed information needs. However, as is typical in adversarial settings, manipulation with
respect to these additional information sources, e.g., artificial creation of hyperlinks, has emerged [4]. Indeed, various
forms of manipulation have been acknowledged as among
the main challenges that search engines have to address [5].
Naturally, then, there is a large body of work on automatically detecting and handling different forms of manipulation
[1, 3].
Throughout this ever evolving process of an adversarial
search setting, a highly interesting question has been somewhat overlooked: how do classical retrieval methods that
depend solely on the content of documents and some corpusbased term statistics perform in the presence of content
manipulation? Intuitively, such approaches, which heavily
rely on within-document term-frequency information, can

be easily “mislead” by the simplest form of manipulation —
keyword stuffing of popular query terms [4]. Indeed, early
experiments in the Web setting have shown that the performance of classical retrieval methods is inferior to that of
Web search engines that utilize, among others, hyperlink
information [10].
Our initial experiments have shown that the relative performance patterns of some classical retrieval strategies can
change in the transition from clean (non-manipulated) corpora to corpora containing content-manipulated documents.
More specifically, we contrasted standard document-based
retrieval with (i) passage-based document retrieval [7], (ii)
cluster-based document retrieval [8], and (iii) pseudo-feedbackbased retrieval [6].
There are numerous research challenges that rise from our
findings. For example, improving the performance of (some
of) these classical retrieval methods under presumed content manipulation conditions, and combining the different
strategies and making them more robust to content manipulation. Developing new content-based retrieval methods
that are resistant to manipulation and are better suited for
the adversarial nature of the Web is another interesting research direction.
Acknowledgments This research is based upon joint work
with Oren Kurland and Moshe Tennenholtz, and is supported in part by the Technion-Microsoft Electronic-Commerce
Research Center and the Miriam and Aaron Gutwirth Memorial Fellowship.

2. REFERENCES

[1] Proceedings of the AIRWeb workshop:adversial information
retrieval on the Web, 2005-2009.
[2] S. Brin and L. Page. The anatomy of a large-scale hypertextual
web search engine. In Proceedings of WWW, pages 107–117,
1998.
[3] C. Castillo, D. Donato, L. Becchetti, P. Boldi, S. Leonardi,
M. Santini, and S. Vigna. A reference collection for web spam.
SIGIR Forum, 40(2):11–24, 2006.
[4] Z. Gyöngyi and H. Garcia-Molina. Web spam taxonomy. In
Proceedings of AIRWeb, pages 39–47, 2005.
[5] M. R. Henzinger, R. Motwani, and C. Silverstein. Challenges in
web search engines. SIGIR Forum, 36(2):11–22, 2002.
[6] V. Lavrenko and W. B. Croft. Relevance-based language
models. In Proceedings of SIGIR, pages 120–127, 2001.
[7] X. Liu and W. B. Croft. Passage retrieval based on language
models. In Proceedings of CIKM, pages 375–382, 2002.
[8] X. Liu and W. B. Croft. Cluster-based retrieval using language
models. In Proceedings of SIGIR, pages 186–193, 2004.
[9] O. A. McBryan. GENVL and WWWW: Tools for taming the
Web. In Proceedings of WWW, 1994.
[10] A. Singhal and M. Kaszkiel. A case study in web search using
TREC algorithms. In Proceedings of WWW, pages 708–716,
2001.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

993

