Enhancing Knowledge Base with Knowledge Transfer
Si-Chi Chin
Information Science
The University of Iowa
Iowa City, Iowa, USA

si-chi-chin@uiowa.edu

ABSTRACT

ity? What are the factors that determine the transfer learning relationship? Does it manifest on a knowledge transfer
network representation? A transfer learning approach can
alleviate the cold-start problem in a KB system, leveraging
knowledge from more popular KB nodes to nodes of limited or empty profiles. A representation of transfer learning
relationships among KB nodes may reveal their hidden ontological connections.
This interdisciplinary research crosses the study area of
information filtering, machine learning, knowledge representation, and network analysis. This proposal motivates the
problem of KBE, discusses the research methodology and
proposed experiments, and reviews related works in information filtering and transfer learning. This line of research
hopes to extend the application of transfer learning to KBE
and to explore a new dimension of IF. The proposed ST and
KTN intends to bring interdisciplinary approaches in the
emerging field of KBE.

A Knowledge Base (KB) stores, organizes, and shares information pertinent to entities (i.e. KB nodes) such as people, organizations, and events. A large KB system, such
as Wikipedia, relies on human curators to create and maintain the content in the systems. However, it has become
challenging for human curators to sift through the rapidly
growing amount of information and filter out the information irrelevant to a KB node. The area of Knowledge Base
Enhancement (KBE) aims to explore and identify automatic
methods to assist human curators to accelerate the process.
KBE can be viewed as a special case of Information Filtering
(IF). However, the lack of high-quality labelled data introduces a major challenge to train a satisfying model for the
task. Transfer learning provides solutions to the problem
and has explored applications in the area of text mining [3],
whereas direct application to KBE or IF remains absent.
Transfer learning is a research area in machine learning,
emphasizing the reuse of previously acquired knowledge to
another applicable task [2]. The intuition of transfer learning comes from that one may find it easier to learn Spanish having learned French; or to perform ballroom dancing
having already practiced figure skating. The method is particularly useful in the situations where labeled instances are
absent or difficult to obtain. To accelerate the growth of
a KB, a transfer learning approach enables leveraging the
heuristics and models learned from one KB node to another.
For example, reusing the learned filtering models from Willie
Nelson, a famous country singer, to Eddie Rabbitt, another
country singer.
Transfer learning requires three components: the target
task (e.g. the problem to be solved), the source task(s) (e.g.
auxiliary data, previously studied problem), and criteria to
select appropriate source tasks. The objectives of my dissertation are twofold. First, it explores methods to identify
informative source nodes from which to transfer. Second,
it constructs a knowledge transfer network to represent the
transfer learning relationship between KB nodes.
This proposed research applies a transfer learning method
– Segmented Transfer (ST) [1]– and a knowledge representation – Knowledge Transfer Network (KTN) – to approach
the area of KBE. The primary research questions include:
What are the transferable objects in information filtering
algorithms? What are the KB nodes of high transferabil-

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.4 [Information Systems Applications]: Miscellaneous;
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Information
filtering

Keywords
Knowledge transfer, Transfer network, Knowledge base enhancement, Information filtering

Acknowledgments
This work was made possible by Grant Number UL1RR024979
from the National Center for Research Resources (NCRR),
part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). Its contents
are solely the responsibility of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official views of the CTSA or NIH.

1.

REFERENCES

[1] S.-C. Chin and W. N. Street. Divide and transfer: an
exploration of unsupervised knowledge transfer. In Proc. The
28th Int. Conf. on Machine Learning (ICML-2011):
Workshop on on Unsupervised and Transfer Learning, 2011.
[2] S. J. Pan and Q. Yang. A survey on transfer learning. IEEE
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering,
22(10):1345–1359, 2010.
[3] W. Pan, E. Zhong, and Q. Yang. Transfer learning for text
mining. In C. C. Aggarwal and C. Zhai, editors, Mining Text
Data, pages 223–257. Springer US, Boston, MA, 2012.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

995

