Improving E-Discovery using Information Retrieval
Kripabandhu Ghosh
Information Retrieval Lab
Indian Statistical Institute
203, B.T. Road, Kolkata - 700108, India

kripa_r@isical.ac.in, kripa.ghosh@gmail.com

ABSTRACT

will retrieve all relevant documents and at the same time,
minimize the number of non-relevant documents in the result set.
An E-discovery topic is diﬀerent from conventional TREC
Ad Hoc topics, so using them straightaway in retrieval produces poor baseline results. Therefore, we plan to generate
the baseline run using sample relevant assessments. Thereafter, our endeavor will be to select terms on the basis of
the baseline run using the traditional query expansion techniques[1] and try to impose a Boolean structure on these
terms based on relations among them.

E-discovery is the requirement that the documents and information in electronic form stored in corporate systems be
produced as evidence in litigation. It has posed great challenges for legal experts. Legal searchers have always looked
to ﬁnd “any and all” evidence for a given case. Thus, a legal search system would essentially be a recall-oriented system. It has been a common practice among expert searchers
to formulate Boolean queries to represent their information
need. We want to work on three basic problems:
1. Boolean query formulation - Our primary goal is to
study Boolean query formulation in the light of the
E-discovery task. This will include automatic Boolean
query generation, expansion and learning the eﬀect of
proximity operators in Boolean searches.

Data fusion
We look to combine the goodness of runs based on the
estimated values of diﬀerent evaluation measures in improving recall. The values of the evaluation measures are based
on a small fraction of the relevant information. We will try
to devise an algorithm which will enable us to choose the
candidate runs whose fusion will lead to an improvement in
recall. We will test our method on the TREC Legal Ad Hoc
datasets.

2. Data fusion - We would also like to explore the eﬀectiveness of data fusion techniques in improving recall.
3. Error modeling - Finally, we will work on error modeling methods for noisy legal documents.

Error modeling
OCR error modeling is crucial while performing retrieval
from noisy OCRed legal documents. So, we will try out new
error modeling techniques on such data.

Boolean query formulation
The Boolean queries have traditionally been created manually and on a trial-and-error basis. It can be useful for the
lawyers if some system can automatically generate Boolean
query suggestions from speciﬁc information needs. Perhaps
the most relevant work in this line is by Kim et al. [2], but
it was done for patent retrieval and the medical domain.
No such work has been reported on the legal domain. We
believe, therefore, that it is worthwhile to investigate this
problem on legal data. The TREC Legal dataset can be
used for this purpose.
To start with, our aim is to form an ideal Boolean query,
i.e., the query that retrieves all and only the relevant documents for the given information need. This will be created
from the available set of relevance judgements. Any automatically generated Boolean query can be compared with
the ideal query which will act as the upper limit of the performance achievable by any Boolean query. One approach
to preparing an ideal query can be to choose the top k terms
in each relevant document based on tf*idf values. The ideal
Boolean query may be diﬃcult to achieve in practice. In
such a case, we will try to form a pseudo ideal query which

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information
Search and Retrieval—Information filtering, Query formulation

General Terms
Algorithms, Legal Aspects, Performance

Keywords
E-Discovery, Boolean query

1. REFERENCES
[1] C. Carpineto and G. Romano. A survey of automatic
query expansion in information retrieval. ACM
Comput. Surv., 44(1):1:1–1:50, Jan. 2012.
[2] Y. Kim, J. Seo, and W. B. Croft. Automatic boolean
query suggestion for professional search. In Proceedings
of the 34th international ACM SIGIR conference on
Research and development in Information Retrieval,
SIGIR ’11, pages 825–834, New York, NY, USA, 2011.
ACM.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

996

