Relevance as a Subjective and Situational
Multidimensional Concept
Carsten Eickhoff
Delft University of Technology
Delft, Netherlands

c.eickhoff@tudelft.nl

Categories and Subject Descriptors

tion need at hand or even the user’s search context. Currently, state-of-the-art retrieval models often treat relevance
(regardless which interpretation of the term was chosen) as
an atomic concept that can be expressed through topical
overlap between document and query or a plain linear combination of multiple scores [6]. Considering the broad audiences a web search engine has to serve, such a method does
not seem optimal as the concrete composition of relevance
will vary from person to person depending on social and
educational context. Furthermore, each individual can be
expected to have situational preference for certain combinations of relevance facets depending on the information need
at hand. We investigate combination schemes which respect
the dimension-speciﬁc relevance distributions. In particular,
we developed a risk-aware method of combining relevance
criteria inspired by the economic Portfolio theory. As a ﬁrst
stage, we applied this method for result set diversiﬁcation
across dimensions.
To evaluate our methods, we will work with 2 large-scale
standard corpora: (1) The Blogs’08 corpus [3], which contains blog posts and related user comments. At the example of this collection, we will investigate criteria such as
topicality and currency for satisfying informational queries.
(2) The upcoming ClueWeb’12 corpus that is currently being compiled is envisioned to be annotated with additional
labels and scores such as the well-known readability measures. Combining readability scores and topicality, we will
investigate the use case of inexperienced readers who prefer
easy-to-read resources while depending on topical relevance.
The evaluation will be based on the notion of usefulness of
shown results for users. Starting oﬀ from simulated audiences with given preference patterns, we will ﬁnally conduct
a real-life study with diﬀerent participant types (e.g., adults
and children).

H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: [Search Process]; H.1.2 [Models and Principles]: [Human Factors]

Keywords
Relevance Models, Personalisation, Score Combination

Abstract
Relevance is the central concept of information retrieval. Although its important role is unanimously accepted among
researchers, numerous diﬀerent deﬁnitions of the term have
emerged over the years (e.g., [1, 2]). Considerable eﬀort
has been put into creating consistent and universally applicable descriptions of relevance in the form of relevance
frameworks. Examples of such frameworks are given by [2,
4]. Across these various formal systems of relevance, a wide
range of relevance criteria has been identiﬁed. The probably
most frequently used single criterion, that in some applications even becomes a synonym for relevance, is topicality. It
expresses a document’s topical overlap with the user’s information need. For textual resources, it is often estimated
based on term co-occurrences between query and document.
There is, however, a signiﬁcant number of further noteworthy relevance criteria. Prominent specimen as for example
compiled by [7, 5] are: (Currency) determines how recent
and up to date the document is. Outdated information may
have become invalid over time. (Availability) expresses
how easy it is to obtain the document. Users might not
want to invest more than a threshold amount of resources
(e.g., disk space, downloading time or money) to get the
document. (Readability) describes the document’s readability and understandability. A document with a high topical relevance towards a given information need can become
irrelevant if the user is not able to extract the desired information from it. (Credibility) contains criteria such as the
document author’s expertise, the publication’s reputation
and the document’s general trustworthiness. (Novelty) describes the document’s contribution to satisfying an information need with respect to the user’s context. E.g., previous
search results or general knowledge about the domain.
It is evident that these criteria can have very diﬀerent
scopes. Some of them are static characteristics of the document or the author, others depend on the concrete informa-

1. REFERENCES

[1] M.J. Bates. Information search tactics. JASIS, 30(4), 1979.
[2] P. Borlund. The concept of relevance in IR. JASIST, 2003.
[3] C. Macdonald, I. Ounis, and I. Soboroﬀ. Overview of the
trec blog track 2009. In TREC 2009, Proceedings, 2009.
[4] S. Mizzaro. Relevance: The whole history. JASIS, 1997.
[5] T.K. Park. The nature of relevance in information retrieval:
An empirical study. The library quarterly, 63(3), 1993.
[6] S. Robertson, H. Zaragoza, and M. Taylor. Simple BM25
extension to multiple weighted ﬁelds. In CIKM 2004.
[7] L. Schamber and J. Bateman. User criteria in relevance
evaluation: Toward development of a measurement scale. In
American Society for Information Science, 1996.

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

998

