Welcome from the General Conference Chair
Welcome to Portland, Oregon, USA for the 35th Annual ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval. SIGIR is the premier international forum for the presentation
of new research results and the demonstration of new systems and techniques in the field of
information retrieval, also known as search. My colleagues and I from Oregon Health & Science
University (OHSU) are pleased to be hosting this year’s SIGIR, and we hope that you enjoy your
stay in Portland as well as the technical and social programs that we have arranged.
Successfully organizing a conference of the size and scope of SIGIR would not be possible without
the dedicated work of a great many individuals. First and foremost, I thank the Program Committee
Chairs, Jamie Callan, Yoelle Maarek, and Mark Sanderson, who together with Posters & Demos
Chairs Falk Scholer, Mark Smucker, and Andrew Turpin put together an excellent main technical
program. I also thank Henning Müller, who organized our slate of tutorials; Eugene Agichtein and
Vanessa Murdock, who organized the workshops; Udo Kruschwitz and Su-Lin Wu, who organized
the industry track; Maarten de Rijke and Mounia Lalmas, who organized the doctoral consortium;
Doug Oard, who served as mentoring chair; and ChengXiang Zhai, who chaired the outstanding
paper awards committee. Collectively, these individuals were largely responsible for the technical
events that most SIGIR participants will attend, and I thank them for their tremendous efforts.
Many other individuals worked largely behind the scenes to ensure that SIGIR 2011 would be a
success, including treasurer, Javed Mostafa; publicity chair, Jayashree Kalpathy-Cramer;
publications chair, Elmer Bernstam; and local arrangements chair, Justin Fletcher. I also thank Aaron
Cohen, who coordinated sponsorship, and Chris Weldon, who served as the webmaster.
Finally, I am indebted to others for the invaluable help and advice they have provided, especially
James Allan, SIGIR Chair, and Ian Soboroff, SIGIR Treasurer.
SIGIR 2012 is, of course, sponsored by ACM, but has also received generous support from
numerous companies and organizations. Microsoft Research, Baidu, and Google were all particularly
generous with support at the Gold level, with Yahoo! Labs providing support at the Silver level and
eBay, IBM Research, and Oracle providing support at the Bronze level. In addition, Morgan &
Claypool, Springer, Cambridge University Press, the University of Oregon Applied Information
Management Program, and Now Publishers all made arrangements to support and exhibit at the
conference. The organization of SIGIR 2012 also would not have been possible without the support
of the Department of Medical Informatics & Clinical Epidemiology at OHSU. Finally, logistical
aspects of the conference were handled with excellence by Kim Lepin of the Division of Continuing
Medical Education at OHSU.
Welcome to Portland, and I hope that you enjoy the conference and your stay in Oregon.

William Hersh
SIGIR 2012 Conference Chair
Oregon Health & Science University
Portland, Oregon, USA

iii

