Topic Model based Privacy Protection in
Personalized Web Search
Wasi Uddin Ahmad, Md Masudur Rahman, Hongning Wang
Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia, VA USA

{wua4nw, mr5ba, hw5x}@virginia.edu

ABSTRACT

of users [6]. Merely hiding a user’s identity is not enough, but we
need to hide a user’s true search intent to ensure privacy. Obfuscate a user’s true search intent to a search engine is very difficult:
we need to first identify the search intent, properly embellish it before submitting to the search engine, such that the returned search
results are still useful. As our preliminary attempt in this direction, we propose a Topic-based Privacy Protection (TPP) approach
to enhance privacy in personalized web search. We have to admit
that there are many different personalization techniques employed
in commercial search engines; in this work, we assume personalization is achieved by server-side constructed user profiles [11].
Our proposed solution is client centered, and no facility is required on the search engine side. When a user submits a query
to the search engine, we send k additional queries which act as a
surrogate to randomize a user’s profile. We refer to those additional queries as cover queries, since they cover or hide a user’s
true intent from the search engine. By adding noise through cover
queries, we force search engine to have lower perception about the
users. By varying the configuration of the generated cover queries,
e.g., entropy, query length, topic proportion etc., we can affect the
precision of the search engine constructed user profile as well as
the level of personalization it can provide. The more cover queries
are submitted with the original query, the less likely the user profile
constructed on the search engine side will disclose a user’s privacy
(but it will be also less useful for personalization).
We use probabilistic topic models to infer users’ search intent
from their issued queries. In particular, we employed Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) model [2] to infer topic proportion of the
original query, and treat the inferred topics as a proxy of users’
search intent. Then we create a set of cover queries by sampling
queries from different topics. To ensure the plausibility of the automatically generated cover queries, we used entropy to measure
the specificity of the cover queries and also varied their length with
Poisson distribution. One advantage of our method is that the topic
model can be trained on an isolated corpus, e.g., news archive, such
that 1) the model can be readily deployed to new users without a requirement of pre-training; 2) the generated cover queries could be
evenly distributed and sufficiently remote from a user’s true intent.

Modern search engines utilize users’ search history for personalization, which provides more effective, useful and relevant search
results. However, it also has the potential risk of revealing users’
privacy by identifying their underlying intention from their logged
search behaviors. To address this privacy issue, we proposed a
Topic-based Privacy Protection solution on client side. In our solution, each user query will be submitted with k additional cover
queries, which will act as a proxy to disguise users’ intent from a
search engine. The set of cover queries are generated in a controlled
way so that each query carries similar uncertainty to randomize a
user’s search history while still providing necessary utility for the
search engine to perform personalization. We used statistical topic
models to infer topics from the original user query and generated
cover queries of similar entropy but from unrelated topics. Extensive experiments are performed on AOL search log and the promising results demonstrated the effectiveness of our solution.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.4 [Information Systems Applications]: Miscellaneous

Keywords
Privacy, Information Retrieval, Personalized Search

1.

INTRODUCTION

Modern search engines, such as Google, Bing, Yahoo, exploit
logged users’ search behaviors to get insights of their search intents for personalization purpose. Although exploitation of search
logs is helpful for improving search effectiveness, but the possibility of building individual user profile raises the concern of privacy
breach. Anonymization of the search log data does not solve the
problem. In 2006, AOL released an anonymized search query log
of around 600,000 randomly selected users. The logs had been
anonymized (at the server side) by removing individually identifying information such as IP address, username and any other personal information associated with that user. However, the actual
queries and their corresponding query time, clicked URL and the
anonymous ID were used to identify the gender, age and location

2.

RELATED WORKS

Complete privacy preservation is possible through Private Information Retrieval (PIR) [4], but its high complexity and inability to
perform targeted personalized search prevent its practical adoption
in commercial search engines. Server-controlled privacy is also
assumed to protect user privacy; but after AOL search log release
incident[1], several methods were proposed for improved query log
anonymization. Researchers also proposed different user controlled
or client-centered approach for privacy preservation. Providing
Privacy through Plausibly Deniable Search (PDS) [7] is one of the
client-centered privacy preserving approaches, and it is closely re-

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.

SIGIR ’16, July 17–21, 2016, Pisa, Italy.
c 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2914753

1025

lated to our proposed solution. In PDS, Latent Semantic Indexing is
used to generate cover queries. PDS constructs a predefined set of
all possible cover queries in an offline manner, while our method
generates the cover queries on the fly. In addition, PDS does not
consider generating standard varieties of cover queries in case of
sequentially edited queries. One of the major bottleneck of PDS is
that it cannot submit user query to the search engine if the query
does not contain words in the predefined dictionary.
In [12, 3], better search results can be achieved with privacy
guarantee if personalization is only performed based on a less sensitive or less specific part of the user profile, namely a generalized profile. The main idea is to build a hierarchical user profile
and not to expose the sensitive part of the profile to the search engine by acquiring the level of privacy requirement from the user.
[13] automatically builds a hierarchical user profile in the client
side based on user specified privacy settings. In Knowledge-based
Scheme [10] a similar approach is proposed to generate distorted
user queries from a semantic point of view in order to preserve
the utility of user profiles. In addition, linguistic analysis techniques are used to properly interpret complex queries submitted by
users and generate new semantically-related queries accordingly.
[8] proposed a different way to protect user privacy by embellishing
the search queries with decoy terms that exhibit similar specificity
spread as the genuine terms, but point to plausible alternative topics. [14] concentrated only on anonymizing user profiles by clustering them into user groups by taking into account the semantic
relationships between query terms while satisfying the privacy constraints. Our proposed model is different from the aforementioned
works as it concentrates on obfuscating users’ true search intent at
the topic level, which is constructed based on external data. And
the balance between privacy protection and utility of search results
is achieved at this topic-level obfuscation.

3.

Figure 1: Workflow of Topic-based Privacy Protection solution.
ferent topics with similar entropy to the original query’s entropy e,
e.g., [e − , e + ]. Hence, if a user’s query is highly concentrated in
sports, less cover queries will be generated from the topic of sports
but more will be generated from business, entertainment etc. If we
failed to get a query within the required entropy range after n attempts, we will select the last generated cover query. To increase
the plausibility of cover queries, we also randomize the length of
cover queries by a Poisson distribution, where the rate parameter
is set to the target user’s average query length. We also generated
random dummy clicks for the cover queries (with the same expectation of the number of clicks in true queries) so that search engines will not have explicit signal to recognize them. Therefore, our
model disguises a user’s true search intents through plausible cover
queries such that search engines cannot easily recognize them.

3.2

METHODOLOGY

Search engines track different type of user information, such as
browsing history, clicked documents, amount of time spent in exploring a returned document, to build the user profile for personalizing the search results. Our proposed solution, Topic-based Privacy Protection (TPP), focuses on obfuscating the user profile by
submitting cover queries along with the original query to the search
engine. As a result, the user profiles constructed on the search engine side contain irrelevant information about the user such that it
reduces the confidence of the search engine to predict users’ specific information need (achieve privacy protection). By controlling
noise injection from client side, TPP maintains the balance between
privacy protection and search effectiveness. Figure 1 describes the
work flow of our proposed solution. In our work, we inject k cover
queries with the original query and submit them to the search engine. After getting the search results for all the submitted queries,
we only keep the results of the original query and re-ranking them
based on the user profile constructed and maintained on the client
side. Finally, the re-ranked search results are provided to the user.
In this way, we prevent the search engine to infer users’ true information need with high fidelity.

3.1

Improving Search Effectiveness

To improve the utility of search results after cover query injection, we also build user profiles on client-side with a user’s true
queries and clicks for search result re-ranking. We assume a user’s
previous search queries and the corresponding clicked documents
are good proxies of a user’s search interests. Following the method
proposed in [11], we use language models to build user profiles. In
particular, we update the user profile immediately after each user
query and result click. All the computation is performed at the
client side, and no additional facility is required from search engine side. Once getting the search results, we only consider the
results of the true user query, and re-rank the returned documents
based on a linear combination of two scoring functions as shown in
Eq (1).
X
1
Score(d) = α
P (t) × T F (t) + (1 − α)
(1)
R
t
The first part is based on the true user profile constructed and
maintained by the client side, where P (t) is the probability of observing term t in user profile and T F (t) is the term frequency of t
in document d. The second part is based on the ranking R of the
documents provided by the search engine. Because search engine
is forced to use an obfuscated query log for personalization, clientside re-ranking will help to improve the utility of resulted ranking,
given the client-side user profile is built on the users’ true query
history and result clicks.

Cover Query Generation

The amount of cover queries determines the strength of privacy
protection. The more diverse those cover queries are, the more difficult it is for a search engine to distinguish individual user’s information needs. But it will also result in degenerated search results.
Therefore, balancing privacy preservation and search effectiveness
is important. We generate cover queries based on the topics inferred
by LDA topic model. We used a large collection of BBC news data
set [5] for LDA model training and generate k cover queries randomly from the learned topics. Cover queries are generated on dif-

4.

EXPERIMENTS

We performed extensive experiments using AOL search log released in 2006 [9]. We built our own search engine based on Apache
Lucene and compared our model with two other previous works [7,
10] for performance evaluation. To the best of our knowledge, no
previous work has validated their solutions in terms of both search
effectiveness and privacy preservation.

1026

4.1

Table 1: Comparison between TPP, PDS and KBS
Settings Model Name
MAP
KL Divergence
MI
TPP
0.1389
0.0496
0.7761
K=1
PDS
NA
NA
NA
KBS
0.0331
2.2723
0.6972
TPP
0.1388
0.0981
0.8523
K=2
PDS
0.1386
0.2281
1.0195
KBS
0.0361
2.2658
1.0869
TPP
0.1388
0.1473
0.9681
K=3
PDS
NA
NA
NA
KBS
0.0363
2.3525
1.1591
TPP
0.1387
0.1894
1.0339
K=4
PDS
0.1386
0.2414
1.0114
KBS
0.0368
2.3965
1.2541
TPP
0.1386
0.2292
1.1413
K=5
PDS
NA
NA
NA
KBS
0.0364
2.3923
1.3237

Dataset & Setup

The AOL search log contains 20M search queries from 0.65M
users from March to May 2006. There are 1,632,797 unique clicked
URLs. We crawled all those URLs using an open source web
crawler, crawler4j. We found approximately 64.4% (1,051,483) of
the URLs are alive and the rest are no longer active. We only collected the text content of each URL to build the index of our search
engine using Apache Lucene, where Okapi BM25 is employed for
ranking. Just for simplicity purpose, our search engine always returns the top 100 documents and thus we calculated mean average
precision (MAP) at 100 to evaluate ranking quality. To personalize the search results, our search engine re-ranks them using the
server-side constructed user profiles before returning the results. In
particular, the server-side user profiles are also constructed using
each submitted user query and the corresponding clicked document
content (with cover queries and dummy clicks). We have selected
the top t words using tf -idf weight from clicked documents content to update user profile. In evaluation, we considered the top
250 users based on the size of their query history. We only used the
unique queries from each user, and all the corresponding clicked
URLs are considered as relevant when measuring the search effectiveness. This gives us 45,200 queries over 250 users. The reason to
remove duplicated queries in each user is that both our method and
baselines will generate different cover queries for repeated queries
with high probability, and this makes it easy to recognize those
generated cover queries.
To build the topic model, which is the core of our cover query
generation procedure, we used BBC dataset [5]. This data set contains news articles of five major topics, namely, business, entertainment, politics, sports and technology. There are 2,225 news
articles and 23,225 unique terms in this dataset. We evaluated our
model by varying the number of cover queries from 1 to 5. We
also experimented with 3 different entropy range ( = 0.1/0.2/0.3).
To evaluate whether the cover queries are disclosing any information about a user’s original query, we computed mutual information
(MI) defined in Eq (2) between them. On the other hand, we also
used Kullback–Leibler divergence as in Eq (3) between the true
user profile on client-side and the noisy user profile on server-side
to measure the amount of privacy disclosure.
XX
p(x, y)
)
(2)
M I(X; Y ) =
p(x, y)log(
p(x)p(y)
yY xX
DKL (P kQ) =

X
i

4.2

P (i) log

P (i)
Q(i)

closest canonical queries does not have any similarity in their content which results in very poor retrieval performance. We improved
their solution by submitting the original user query along with the
cover queries generated. As a result, we got improved MAP but
smaller KL divergence and higher mutual information which assert
that our model is more effective than PDS.
KBS relies on structured knowledge modeled in the form of ontology, and it focuses on nouns and noun phrases when analyzing user queries. We implemented this method based on WordNet and ODP categories [10], which are organized in hierarchical structures. According to KBS, a new query set is constructed
from a semantic point of view using predefined hierarchical structure of topical categories. Since the original query is not submitted
to search engine in KBS, it can only provide limited search quality to users. In its original paper, KBS model is not validated for
search effectiveness but we evaluated its performance through our
implemented search engine. It is important to note that, KBS only
uses the category name in the predefined hierarchy as cover queries
and as a result, the resulting retrieval performance is extremely bad.
The generated cover queries in KBS are more specific compared to
those from our model (since it is already a summary of users’ search
intents), which might give the search engine reasonable amount of
information about user intents.
TPP has two parameters: the number of cover queries k, and the
entropy range . Though the impact of entropy range is not evident
in the average MAP across users, it is evident in individual user’s
MAP. Increase in entropy range (e.g., from 0.2 to 0.3) decreases
MAP around 1% for some users as cover queries become more diverse. We have also evaluated TPP with different number of topics
(e.g., 5, 7, 9) during topic model training and got very similar results (in terms of MAP), which indicates the robustness of TPP with
respect to the specific topic model used. We also tested TPP for k=0
to verify how much TPP is affecting the search effectiveness, and
found that the decrease in MAP is negligible. Moreover, We tested
TPP without client side re-ranking and surprisingly we got better
MAP in that scenario: with client side re-ranking, we got a MAP
of 0.123 while the MAP without the client side re-ranking is 0.138.
Though for some users, client side re-ranking greatly improved the
MAP but for many users it has fallen short to ensure better MAP.
One major reason for this degenerated retrieval performance after
client-side re-ranking is due to our pre-processing, where we have
removed the duplicated queries from each user but such profilebased personalization mostly improves repeated queries. In our future work, we will evaluate our model with larger number of users
with their full search log.
We also computed the difference between Information Content
(IC) [10] of true user query and a corresponding cover query generated in TPP, PDS and KBS. The degree of IC between original

(3)

Results

We compared our model with Plausible Deniable Search (PDS)
[7] and Knowledge-based Scheme (KBS) [10], and the proposed
TPP outperformed both of them in terms of search effectiveness and
privacy preservation. The detailed comparison between our model
and the baselines is presented in Table 1 under different number of
cover queries.
We implemented the PDS model on BBC dataset and evaluated it
in our search engine. The total number of seed queries was 13,668
and total number of canonical queries was 13,340. The number of
PD query sets found at level 0 and level 1 was 6735 and 3367 respectively. Since PDS creates cover queries through hierarchical
clustering, only 2n number of cover queries can be generated and
thus we cannot report the performance of it for k = 1, 3, 5 cases in
Table 1. The major bottleneck of PDS is that it fails to generate any
cover query if a query term can not be found in the predefined dictionary (no query will be submitted to search engine then). Another
limitation of PDS is that the PD query sets do not cover all words
in the predefined dictionary, and oftentimes the user query and the

1027

generating better cover queries. In addition, we will also explore
how to control the cover query generation dynamically such that
the trade-off between personalization and privacy can be optimized
for the long run. In addition, our current solution does not handle users’ ego-surfing behaviors, such as searching for their own
names or social security numbers. Classifiers can be built to recognize such queries and generate cover queries of the same type
accordingly.

and cover query is evaluated as the ratio between the query with
the highest hit count with respect to the other. We picked 1500
user queries randomly and their corresponding two cover queries,
in total of 3000 query pairs from each model to calculate IC ratio which is depicted in Figure 2. We used Microsoft Bing API to
find the hit counts of queries. As shown in Figure 2, information
content ratio of our model is smaller compared to PDS and KBS,
because in PDS cover queries are generated from frequent patterns
and in KBS hierarchical category names from ODP is used to generate cover queries. Since higher IC ratio means the specificity of
original query and cover queries are not similar, the cover queries
generated in PDS and KBS may reveal user privacy which is handled in TPP.

7.

8.

DISCUSSIONS

The number of generated cover queries are predefined in our
model. But we should note that different users would need different level of privacy protection, and these trade-offs might also
vary across different search tasks. We can rely on users to set their
privacy level but it would be more useful if we can assess the level
of protection required from a user’s previous search history and behaviors. Moreover, we should be able to estimate the most feasible
entropy range over a period of time to have more balanced personalization and privacy protection. We are learning the topic models
only on news data set now, but increasing the diversity of training
data sets, e.g., combining data from different sources (e.g., user reviews, social media, and forum discussions) would give us a more
comprehensive topic model to generate cover queries.

6.

REFERENCES

[1] M. Barbaro, T. Zeller, and S. Hansell. A face is exposed for
aol searcher no. 4417749. New York Times, 9(2008):8For,
2006.
[2] D. M. Blei. Probabilistic topic models. Communications of
the ACM, 55(4):77–84, 2012.
[3] G. Chen, H. Bai, L. Shou, K. Chen, and Y. Gao. Ups:
efficient privacy protection in personalized web search. In
Proceedings of the 34th international ACM SIGIR
conference on Research and development in Information
Retrieval, pages 615–624. ACM, 2011.
[4] B. Chor, E. Kushilevitz, O. Goldreich, and M. Sudan. Private
information retrieval. Journal of the ACM (JACM),
45(6):965–981, 1998.
[5] D. Greene and P. Cunningham. Practical solutions to the
problem of diagonal dominance in kernel document
clustering. In Proc. 23rd International Conference on
Machine learning (ICML’06), pages 377–384. ACM Press,
2006.
[6] D. Halse et al. I know what you did last summer. Advocate:
Newsletter of the National Tertiary Education Union,
21(1):14, 2014.
[7] M. Murugesan and C. Clifton. Providing privacy through
plausibly deniable search. In SDM, pages 768–779. SIAM,
2009.
[8] H. Pang, X. Ding, and X. Xiao. Embellishing text search
queries to protect user privacy. Proceedings of the VLDB
Endowment, 3(1-2):598–607, 2010.
[9] G. Pass, A. Chowdhury, and C. Torgeson. A picture of
search. In InfoScale, volume 152, page 1, 2006.
[10] D. Sánchez, J. Castellà-Roca, and A. Viejo.
Knowledge-based scheme to create privacy-preserving but
semantically-related queries for web search engines.
Information Sciences, 218:17–30, 2013.
[11] X. Shen, B. Tan, and C. Zhai. Implicit user modeling for
personalized search. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM
international conference on Information and knowledge
management, pages 824–831. ACM, 2005.
[12] L. Shou, H. Bai, K. Chen, and G. Chen. Supporting privacy
protection in personalized web search. Knowledge and Data
Engineering, IEEE Transactions on, 26(2):453–467, 2014.
[13] Y. Xu, K. Wang, B. Zhang, and Z. Chen. Privacy-enhancing
personalized web search. In Proceedings of the 16th
international conference on World Wide Web, pages
591–600. ACM, 2007.
[14] Y. Zhu, L. Xiong, and C. Verdery. Anonymizing user profiles
for personalized web search. In Proceedings of the 19th
international conference on World wide web, pages
1225–1226. ACM, 2010.

Figure 2: Information Content comparison between TPP, KBS and
PDS

5.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank the anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments.
This paper is based upon work supported in part by a Yahoo Academic Career Enhancement Award and the National Science Foundation under grants IIS-1553568.

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS

In this work, we developed a novel solution to protect user privacy based on their inferred search intent from topic models. The
topic model, as a core component of our solution, can be estimated
on an isolated document collection, which ensures protection of individual users’ privacy and its general applicability. Both the specificity and length of the generated cover queries are carefully controlled to ensure the plausibility of cover queries. We experimented
with 250 users over their 3 months’ search history, in total of 45,200
queries from the AOL search log to prove the effectiveness of our
model. The proposed method improved both search effectiveness
and privacy protection against two state-of-the-art baselines.
Our current solution generates cover queries independently from
the search context, e.g., queries in the same session and a user’s
previous clicks. This will inevitably hurt not only the plausibility
of cover queries but also search effectiveness. As our future work,
we will explicitly model a user’s sequential search behaviors for

1028

