To Blend or Not to Blend? Perceptual Speed, Visual
Memory and Aggregated Search
Lauren Turpin, Diane Kelly and Jaime Arguello
School of Information and Library Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA
lwturpin@gmail.com, dianek@email.unc.edu, jarguell@email.unc.edu

ABSTRACT

different mix of results might be generated for a different query.

While aggregated search interfaces that present vertical results to
searchers are fairly common in today’s search environments, little
is known about how searchers’ cognitive abilities impact how
they use and evaluate these interfaces. This study evaluates the
relationship between two cognitive abilities – perceptual speed
and visual memory – and searchers’ behaviors and interface
preferences when using two aggregated search interfaces: one that
blends vertical results into the search results (blended) and one
that does not (non-blended). Cognitive tests were administered to
sixteen participants who subsequently performed four search tasks
using the two interfaces. Participants’ search interactions were
logged and after searching, they rated the usability, engagement
and effectiveness of each interface, as well as made comparative
evaluations. Results showed that participants with low perceptual
speed spent significantly more time completing tasks when using
the blended interface, while those with high perceptual speed
spent roughly equivalent amounts of time completing tasks with
the two interfaces. Those with low perceptual speed also rated
both interfaces as significantly less usable along many measures,
and were less satisfied with their searches. There were also main
effects for interface: participants rated the non-blended interface
significantly more usable than the blended interface.

Recently, there have been a growing number of studies on
aggregated search interfaces [3, 4, 6, 12, 14]. Some of this work
suggests individual differences might play a role in users’
evaluations of aggregated search interfaces. Both Arguello et al.
[4] and Bron et al. [6] compared blended and non-blended
interfaces for aggregated search and found no clear preference. In
Arguello et al.’s study, participants who preferred the nonblended display stated the blended display was confusing and
harder to navigate, and the vertical results distracting. Participants
who preferred the blended display described it as helpful, visually
pleasing and easier to use. The authors concluded, “people who
are more visual thinkers might prefer the blended display and
people who are novice users and/or have attention difficulties
might prefer the non-blended display” (p. 443). Bron, et al.
studied graduate students conducting multi-session searches and
found most searchers moved between the blended and nonblended displays, suggesting the usefulness of the display might
depend on the task or stage. However, there was no clear
switching pattern: some started with blended then switched to
non-blended, while others did the opposite. The authors noted
these variations were likely a result of individual differences.
One way that individuals differ is according to cognitive abilities.
A person’s cognitive abilities are their capacities to perform
various mental activities such as problem solving, reasoning,
remembering, and decision-making [8]. Examples of cognitive
abilities include perceptual speed, associative memory, and
visualization ability. Variations in some cognitive abilities might
make it more challenging for certain people to interact with
vertical search interfaces. For example, someone who has low
visual memory might have a more difficult time navigating
around, or filtering out, visual verticals such as images and
videos. Hiding these vertical results from view until the searcher
is ready to use them might lead to a better search experience.

Keywords
Aggregated search interfaces, search behavior, cognitive ability

1. INTRODUCTION
The goal of aggregated search is to combine results from multiple
search engines in a single presentation. Most commercial search
portals such as Bing and Google provide access to a wide range of
specialized search engines called verticals. Different verticals
focus on different types of media (images, news) or help users
perform different types of tasks (shopping, local). Vertical results
can always be accessed using tabs at the top of the search results
page (SERP). However, in certain cases, depending on the query,
the search portal may also decide to showcase a particular vertical
by blending a few of its top results somewhere above, within, or
below the first page of web results. The idea is to inform users
that the underlying vertical might have relevant content. For
example, in response to the query “tiger”, Bing mixes results from
the news, video, and image verticals along with web results. A

In this work, we focus on two cognitive abilities, perceptual speed
and visual memory. The basic research question we address is:
How do users’ perceptual speed and visual memory abilities
impact their search behaviors and interface preferences in the
context of aggregated search? Perceptual speed is a person’s
“speed in comparing figures or symbols, scanning to find figures
or symbols, or carrying out other very simple tasks involving
visual perception” [9, p. 123]. Several recent studies have shown
that people with lower perceptual speed experience greater
workload during search and interact at slower rates than those
with higher perceptual speed [1, 5]. Another study has shown that
those with lower perceptual speed achieved lower precision and
recall [2]. Thus, we choose this ability in part because existing
evidence shows it plays a role in search interaction. In the context
of aggregated search, perceptual speed may come into play as a
person scans the search results to identify relevant bits of
information. The inclusion of verticals might make this process

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from:
Permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR ’16, July 17-21, 2016, Pisa, Italy
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to
ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07…$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2914809

1021

Memory test was used to measure visual memory (VM). These
are standardized tests that have been used in a large number of
studies. Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics of the cognitive
tests, which show our results were within one standard deviation
of the reference score [9]. The median was used to divide
participants equally into high/low PS and VM groups.

more difficult for those with low perceptual speed since there are
different types of information to parse.
Visual memory is “the ability to remember configuration, location
and orientation of figural material” [9, p. 109]. Visualization
ability, which is different from visual memory, has been studied
frequently in search, although most studies have found little to no
effects on visualization ability and search behavior and success.
The one exception [5] found those with lower visualization ability
issued fewer queries, made fewer SERP clicks and visited fewer
URLs. Conversely, visual memory has not been investigated
much in the context of search applications. In a study of email
applications, it was found that people with low visual memory
were slower carrying out certain tasks [10]. The authors observed
that an interface that allows people with low visual memory to
focus on the specific aspect of the interface that is most helpful to
a particular task might be beneficial; this observation seems to
have implications for aggregated search interfaces. When various
verticals are blended into the SERP a person with low visual
memory might have a more difficult time remembering the
content of visual verticals and their locations on the SERP.

Table 1. Scores on cognitive abilities tests.
Possible Range
Mean (SD)
Median
Min, Max
EKM Mean (SD)
(Reference Scores)

Perceptual Speed
0-200
51.94 (10.41)
51
34, 74
Males: 47 (14.9)
Females: 54 (14.9)

Visual Memory
-32 - +32
18 (8.69)
20.5
-2, 30
21.4 (4.3)

2.3 Search Tasks
Each participant completed four search tasks: two with each
display. The order of the tasks and interfaces were
counterbalanced, although participants always used one interface
to complete two tasks before they moved to the next interface.
The search tasks come from Kelly et al.’s [11] work; specifically,
we used the four “Create” tasks. Create tasks require people to
generate different things: a plan for constructing a soapbox derby
car, an exercise program, a mascot for a sports team and a design
for a living room. Kelly et al.’s [11] participants took about ten
minutes completing these types of tasks, which is one reason we
decided to use them. We also thought participants might need to
use vertical results to address the tasks, or at least would issue
queries that were likely to return vertical results. To limit the
session to one hour, we gave participants a ten-minute task time
limit; on average they spent about 6 minutes per task.

2. METHOD
A laboratory experiment was conducted using two aggregated
search interfaces: one that blended vertical results into the Web
results and one that only provided indirect access to the verticals
through tabs. Figure 1 presents a screenshot of the blended
interface. In both interfaces, vertical results could be accessed via
tabs at the top and side of the interface. The blended interface
also presented vertical results on the initial SERP, which were
blocked in set positions for each vertical, if any were returned.
They were blended in the same order: web results (1-3), images,
video, web results (4-6), news, web results (7-10), and shopping
The Bing API was used to generate Web results as well as results
for the news, images and video verticals. The eBay API was used
to generate results for the shopping vertical.

2.4 Interface Evaluation
Participants evaluated the interfaces and their search experiences
using three types of questionnaires: post-task, post-system and
exit questionnaires. The post-task questionnaire asked participants
to rate how difficult it was to find relevant documents, their
ability to find relevant documents, the system’s ability at
retrieving relevant documents, how many relevant documents
they thought they found and search success. The post-system
questionnaire contained the 10-item System Usability Scale (SUS)
[7] and four subscales of the User Engagement Scale (UES) [13]:
(1) focused attention, (2) felt involvement, (3) perceived usability
and (4) endurability. All items were evaluated with 5-point scales,
where higher values indicated more of the construct being
measured or greater agreement. For both the SUS and UES, we
followed the analyses guidelines put forward by the authors [6,
13]. Participants’ responses to the 10-item SUS were averaged to
arrive at an overall SUS score. Participants’ responses to each of
the four UES subscales were averaged to obtain overall scores for
each subscale. These averages were then averaged to arrive at an
overall engagement score.

Figure 1. Screen shot of the blended search interface.

2.1 Participants
Participants were recruited through a mass email to the staff list at
University of North Carolina. Sixteen participants were enrolled
who had an average age of 36 (SD=11.81). Three participants
were male and 13 female. Eleven participants had bachelor’s
degrees, three had master’s degrees and two had doctorates. All
participants had more than 10 years of computer experience.
Participants were compensated with $15.00.

The post-system questionnaire also contained five items about
search effectiveness and four about ease of use, including items
about the usefulness of the information returned and the
presentation method. These items were evaluated with 5-point
agreement scales. Reliability analysis was performed to determine
if we could average items. The Cronbach’s alpha for the search
effectiveness items was 0.861 and 0.681 for the ease of use items.
These values support combining responses for analyses.

2.2 Cognitive Tests
Each participant completed two cognitive abilities tests from the
Ekstrom Kit of Factor-Referenced Cognitive Test to assess
perceptual speed and visual memory [9]. The Finding A’s test
was used to measure perceptual speed (PS) and the Shape

1022

main effects for perceptual speed or interface on any measure, but
there was a significant interaction effect between perceptual speed
and interface for time: Low-PS participants spent longer
completing tasks with the blended interface, while High-PS
participants spent similar amounts of time completing tasks
regardless of interface (F(1, 16)=6.33, p=0.015).

3. RESULTS
Unless otherwise reported, mixed ANOVAs were used to analyze
the data, with cognitive ability (high, low) as a between-subjects
factor and interface (non-blended, blended) as a within-subjects
factor. There were no significant main effects for visual memory
for any of the user experience or search behavior measures, and
there were no significant interaction effects between interface and
either of cognitive abilities except for time. Because of space, we
only present results related to perceptual speed and interface, and
the interaction for time.

Participants’ clicks were further analyzed to determine if they
selected any vertical results or navigated to another SERP display.
Table 2 shows these frequencies according to perceptual speed.
Overall, participants with high perceptual speed clicked on more
vertical results (n=16) than those with low perceptual speed (n=6).
An analysis of the mean number of clicks was not significant.
Participants also clicked on more verticals when they were using
the blended interface, which is not surprising since the vertical
results were integrated into the default SERP. An analysis of the
means showed a significant difference [nonblended: 0.06
(SD=0.35); blended: 0.63 (SD=0.91); F(1, 16)=11.15, p=0.001].
The last three columns of the table show how many clicks
originated from different types of SERPs, some of which were
only accessible via tabs. Everything SERP was only available in
the blended display; this was also the default SERP for this
interface, while in the non-blended interface Web SERP was the
default. Table 2 shows that High-PS and Low-PS participants
made similar numbers of clicks from the Everything SERP, but
High-PS participants navigated more often to the vertical SERPs
(images, videos, news or shopping) (7 vs. 0 clicks). Participants
made more clicks on the Web SERP when using the non-blended
display, which is not surprising since this was the default SERP.
Of potential interest is that while there were 10 cases where HighPS participants made the effort to select the Web SERP over the
default Everything SERP when using the blended interface, there
were no instances of Low-PS participants doing this.

Figures 2, 3 and 4 display the post-task and post-system measures
according to perceptual speed and interface. There were
significant main effects for perceptual speed on four of the five
post-task measures (Figure 2). High-PS participants rated their
search skills higher (F(1, 16)=4.42, p=0.04) and system
performance higher (F(1, 16)=8.75, p=0.005). They also rated
their searches as more successful (F(1, 16)=4.41, p=0.04) and
believed they had found more of the relevant documents (F(1,
16)=9.58, p=0.003). There were several significant main effects
for perceptual speed on participants’ post-system evaluations
(Figures 3 and 4). High-PS participants rated the ease of use
(Figure 2) and perceived usability (Figure 3) of both systems
higher than low-PS participants [(F(1, 16)=5.20, p=0.04) and
(F(1, 16)=5.60, p=0.03), respectively. There were also several
significant main effects for interface. The non-blended interface
received significantly greater SUS scores (F(1, 16)=5.48, p=0.03)
and ease of use scores (F(1, 16)=6.09, p=0.03) than the blended
interface (Figure 2).
Figure 5 displays the mean number of queries and clicks made by
participants according to perceptual speed and interface, and the
amount of time taken to complete tasks. There were no significant

Figure 2. Post-task evaluations according to perceptual speed and
interface (NB=Non-blended; B=Blended; *p<0.05; **p<0.01).

Figure 3. Post-system evaluations according to perceptual
speed and interface (NB=Non-blended; B=Blended;
*p<0.05).

Figure 4. User Engagement post-system evaluations according to
perceptual speed and interface (NB=Non-blended; B=Blended;
*p<0.05).

Figure 5. Search behaviors according to perceptual speed
and interface (NB=Non-blended; B=Blended; **p<0.01).

1023

perceptual system and future research might focus on developing
interfaces that improve the search experience for people with
Low-PS. Projecting even further into the future, researchers
might also begin to consider the role of other cognitive abilities,
such as those that emphasize auditory and memory skills, on
voice-based search interactions.

Table 2. Number of clicks on vertical results and SERPs
according to perceptual speed and interface.

HPS

LPS

Total

NB
B
Total
NB
B
Total
NB
B

Vertical
Results
2
14
16
0
6
6
2
20

Everything
SERP
80
80
85
85
165

Web
SERP
73
10
83
94
0
94
167
10

Vertical
SERP
2
5
7
0
0
0
2
5

5. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported in part by NSF grant IIS-1451668. Any
opinions, findings, conclusions, and recommendations expressed
in this paper are the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of
the sponsor.

6. REFERENCES
[1] Al-Maskari, A. & Sanderson, M. (2011). The effect of user
characteristics on search effectiveness in information
retrieval. IP&M, 47, 719-729.

4. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In this paper, we investigated the impact of two cognitive
abilities, perceptual speed and visual memory, on searchers’
behaviors and interface evaluations when using two aggregated
search interfaces: one that blended vertical results into the search
results and one that did not. Overall, we found no effects for
visual memory ability, but a number of effects for perceptual
speed, which is consistent with other studies (although none of
these past studies have focused on aggregated search).

[2] Allen, B. (1994). Perceptual speed, learning and information
retrieval performance. Proc. of SIGIR, 71-80.
[3] Arguello, J. & Capra, R. (2012) The effect of aggregated
search coherence on search behavior. Proc. of SIGIR, 12931302.
[4] Arguello, J., Wu, W.-C., Kelly, D., & Edwards, A. (2012).
Task complexity, vertical display and user interaction in
aggregated search. Proc. of SIGIR, 435-444.

Perceptual speed (PS) had a significant effect on many of our user
experience measures. High-PS participants rated the perceived
usability and ease of use of both systems higher than Low-PS
participants. These participants also rated their search skills
higher, system performance higher, their searches as more
successful and believed they had found a greater number of
relevant documents. Overall, these results indicate that High-PS
participants had more positive search experiences than Low-PS
participants regardless of interface.

[5] Brennan, K., Kelly, D. & Arguello, J. (2014). The effect of
cognitive abilities on information search for tasks of varying
levels of complexity. Proc. of IIiX, 165-174.
[6] Bron, M., van Gorp, J., Nack, F., Baltussen, L.B. & de Rijke,
M. (2013). Aggregated search interface preferences in multisession search tasks. Proc. of SIGIR, 123-132.
[7] Brooke, J. (1996). SUS: A “quick and dirty” usability scale.
Usability Evaluation in Industry. Taylor & Francis.

We also found a main effect for interface on usability and easy
use. The non-blended interface received significantly higher
usability and ease of use scores than the blended interface. An
examination of participants’ clicks showed that they did not select
many vertical results. Thus, the difference in usability and easy or
use measures might be because the verticals were not useful and
therefore an unwelcome (and unusable) distraction on the blended
interface. In this study, we controlled the type and placement of
verticals and this finding might not apply to vertical displays that
are generated dynamically in response to queries. Although
participants could change the display of verticals by selecting Web
SERP, there were few instances where this occurred and no
instances of Low-PS participants clicking on Web SERP.
Initially, we thought that Low-PS participants might be more
inclined to do this so as to reduce the complexity of the perceptual
space, but it might be that these participants did not notice or
realize this was possible; indeed, Low-PS participants never
changed the default SERP. Low-PS participants also spent
significantly longer completing tasks with the blended interface,
which might have contributed to its lower usability scores.

[8] Carroll, J. B. (1993). Human Cognitive Abilities: A Survey of
Factor-analytic studies. Cambridge University Press.
[9] Ekstrom, R.B., French, J.W., Harman, H.H. and Dermen, D.
(1976). Kit of Factor-Referenced Cognitive Tests.
Educational Testing Service, Princeton, NJ.
[10] Gwizdka, J. & Chignell, M. (2004). Individual differences
and task-based user interface evaluation: A case study of
pending tasks in email. Interacting with Computers, 769-797.
[11] Kelly, D., Arguello, J., Edwards, A. & Wu, W.-C. (2015).
Development and evaluation of search tasks for IIR
experiments using a cognitive complexity framework. Proc.
of ICTIR, 101-110.
[12] Liu, Z., Liu, Y., Zhou, K., Zhang, M. & Ma, S. (2015).
Influence of vertical result in Web search examination.
Proc. of SIGIR, 193-202.
[13] O’Brien, H.L. & Toms, E.G. (2010). The development and
evaluation of a survey to measure user engagement. JASIST,
61(1), 50-69.

Overall, our results call into question the idea of one-size-fits-all
search interfaces, especially when they involve aggregating
different types of search results. Our results, combined with those
of other researchers’, highlight the importance of perceptual speed
in search. Current search modalities place great demands on the

[14] Sushmita, S., Joho, H., & Lalmas, M. (2009). A task-based
evaluation of an aggregated search interface. Proc. of SPIRE,
322–333.

1024

