Uncovering Task Based Behavioral Heterogeneities in
Online Search Behavior
Rishabh Mehrotra

Prasanta Bhattacharya

Emine Yilmaz

Dept. of Computer Science
University College London
London United Kingdom

Dept. of Information Systems
National University of
Singapore

Dept. of Computer Science
University College London
London United Kingdom

r.mehrotra@cs.ucl.ac.uk

prasanta@comp.nus.edu.sg emine.yilmaz@ucl.ac.uk

ABSTRACT

seek to complete multiple search tasks within a single search
session [14, 15, 22], while also taking multiple sessions to finish a single task at times. The emergence of multi-tasking
behavior within a single search session makes it particularly
complex to use user information from search sessions to personalize the user’s search activity. This necessitates a shift
in focus from search sessions to search tasks as a more accurate unit of analysis of human search behavior.
In our current analyses, we build upon search sessions to
identify and characterize search tasks and topics. In characterizing these search tasks across sessions, we consider the
possibility of three distinct forms of heterogeneity inherent
in the search-task behavior. First, there could be userdisposition level heterogeneity wherein some users have a
higher propensity to multi-task when searching for information, than other users. Second, there could be topic level
heterogeneity wherein searchers have a higher (or lower)
propensity to multi-task when searching information for specific kind of topics. Third, and finally, there could be userinterest level heterogeneity wherein users might have a higher
or lower propensity to multi-task when searching for topics
they are most or least interested in.
While recent work has highlighted the prevalence of multitasking behavior in online search [14, 15, 22], not much effort
has been expended at fully characterizing online search tasks
with an emphasis on such user- and topic-level differences.
In the current study, we leverage a large dataset of real world
search logs to perform a large scale characterization of search
tasks with a focus on such differences. Specifically, we find
that while most users (>50%) choose to multi-task in their
search sessions, there exists significant differences in their
choice of topics between single-task and multi-task sessions.
Through our analyses we offer the following three insights:
(i) Users’ preference towards multitasking(3.2): We
find evidence that most users multi-task when searching for
information with over 50% users completing more than 2
tasks within a single search session, and a minority of users
even completing more than 5 tasks within a single session.
(ii) Topic level heterogeneity(3.3): For certain type of
topics, users prefer to multi-task (e.g. kids, news, shopping
etc.), while for certain others, users prefer to single-task (e.g.
computers, games, adult etc.).
(iii) User-interest level heterogeneity(3.4): Users have
different preferences towards multitasking depending on their
level of interest in the specific search topic (e.g. some groups
of users prefer to search about most-interested topics in
single-tasking sessions and least-interested topics in multtasking sessions).

While a major share of prior work have considered search
sessions as the focal unit of analysis for seeking behavioral
insights, search tasks are emerging as a competing perspective in this space. In the current work, we quantify user
search task behavior for both single- as well as multi-task
search sessions and relate it to tasks and topics. Specifically, we analyze user-disposition, topic and user-interest
level heterogeneities that are prevalent in search task behavior. Our results show that while search multi-tasking is
a common phenomenon among the search engine users, the
extent and choice of multi-tasking topics vary significantly
across users. We find that not only do users have varying propensities to multi-task, they also search for distinct
topics across single-task and multi-task sessions. To our
knowledge, this is among the first studies to fully characterize online search tasks with a focus on user- and topic-level
differences that are observable from search sessions.

CCS Concepts
•Information systems → Task models;

Keywords
Search tasks; Multitasking; User Behavior

1.

INTRODUCTION

Users’ information search behavior on search engines often span various motivations [2, 14]. While simple informational needs, such as ”Adele’s latest music” can be satisfied
in a single search session, most other informational needs
are complex and time-consuming. Consequently, users accomplish more complex information search tasks by issuing
a series of search queries spanning multiple search sessions,
possibly spread over multiple days. While a major portion of
existing work have investigated search behavior using search
sessions as the fundamental focus of search activity [6, 18,
19, 20, 24, 25], more recent studies suggest that users often
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.

SIGIR ’16, July 17-21, 2016, Pisa, Italy
c 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2914755

1049

620M
190M
2M
3.18
76.01
2.08

60	  
50	  
40	  
30	  

Table 1: Data summary
Time
05/29/2012 14:06:04
05/29/2012 14:11:49
05/29/2012 14:12:01
05/29/2012 14:06:04
05/29/2012 14:11:49
05/29/2012 14:12:01
05/29/2012 14:22:12

Query
adele songs
wedding venue
video download
Obama care
running shoes
sports shoes
wedding cards

Table 2:

SessionID
1
1
1
2
2
2
2

20	  

TaskID
1
2
3
4
5
5
2

Topic
Arts
Society
Arts
News
Shopping
Shopping
Society

RELATED WORK

2	  

3	  

4	  

5	  

6	  

7	  

8	  

9	  

10	  

10+	  

Figure 1:

Quantifying the extent of multi-tasking within a session

Task Extraction

For our analysis, we make use of the Latent Structural
SVM framework [23] for task identification. Given query sequences within sessions, search tasks are identified by clustering queries into tasks by find the strongest link between
a candidate query and queries in the target cluster (bestlink ).
This is achieved by making use of a structural learning method
with latent variables, i.e., latent structural SVMs, to utilize
the hidden structure of query inter-dependencies to explore
the dependency among queries within the same task.
Given a query sequence Q = q1 , q2 , ..., qM , a feature vector
for the task partition y is specified by the hidden best-link
structure h as ψ(Q, y, h). Based on ψ(Q, y, h), the bestlink
SVM is a linear model parameterized by w, and predicts the
task partition by,
(y∗, h∗) = argmaxy,h wT ψ(Q, y, h)

(1)

where Y and H represent the sets of possible structures of y
and h respectively. y∗ becomes the output for cross-session
tasks and h∗ is the inferred latent structure. Based on the
best-link structure, h(qi , qj ) = 1 if query qi and qj are directly connected in h; and otherwise, h(qi , qj ) = 0, with the
added clause that a a query
can only link to another query
Pj−1
in the past, or formally,
i=0 h(qi , qj ) = 1 ∀j ≥ 1. The
feature vector for any particular task partition y is defined
over the links in h as,

CHARACTERIZING SEARCH TASKS

3.1.1

1	  

Avg	  Number	  of	  Tasks	  Performed	  in	  a	  Session	  

3.1.2

We characterize online search sessions with a focus on
the underlying user-level and topic level heterogeneities. As
mentioned earlier, we investigate the prevalence of three related forms of search heterogeneity viz. (i) user-disposition
level (do focused users behave differently than multi-taskers),
(ii) topic level (are some topics more prone to multi-tasking?),
and (iii) user-interest level differences in search behavior (do
users’ task behavior vary across their topical interests). We
next describe our experimental setup (Section 3.1) based on
which we discuss our findings in Section 3.2, 3.3 & 3.4.

3.1

0	  

who participate in <50 sessions, and focus instead on the
more active user population. Table 1 presents a summary
of the query, session and task information in our empirical
context. Our dataset comprises 620 million queries spanning
190 million search sessions, with an average of 3 queries and
2 tasks per search session.

There has been a large body of work focused on the problem of segmenting and organizing query logs into semantically coherent structures. Many of these methods use the
idea of a timeout cutoff between queries, where two consecutive queries are considered as two different sessions or
tasks if the time interval between them exceeds a certain
threshold, often 30 minutes [5, 9, 20]. However, the experimental results of these methods indicate that the timeouts,
whatever their lengths, are of limited utility in predicting
whether two queries belong to the same task, and unsuitable for identifying session boundaries. There have been attempts to extract in-session tasks [11, 14, 21], cross-session
tasks [12, 23, 13] and hierarchies of tasks and subtasks [16]
from query sequences based on classification and clustering
methods. While existing research has investigated user behavior separately across sessions [1] and across tasks [10],
in this work, we fully characterize search tasks with a focus
on user and topic level differences, and jointly model user
interactions across sessions, topics and tasks.

3.

10	  

Sample search sessions

Analyzing such heterogeneities in online search behavior
lends us a better understanding of how users interact with
search systems when performing different tasks.

2.

No	  of	  Users	  (In	  %)	  

No of Queries
No of Sessions
No of Users
Avg No of queries per session
Avg no of sessions per user
Avg no of tasks per session

ψ(Q, y, h) =

X
i,j

h(qi , qj )

S
X

φs (qi , qj )

(2)

s=1

where a set of symmetric pairwise features φs (qi , qj ) is given
to characterize the similarity between query qi and qj . Given
a set of query logs with annotated tasks, the feature vector
design and the directed linkage structure of h can be inferred
in an SVM setting. A detailed overview of the approach can
be found in Wang et al. [23].

Experimental Setup
Data Context

We use backend search logs for users of a major US-based
search engine for a period of 30 days from May 1, 2015 to
May 31, 2015 and choose a random sample of over 2 million
users where each user is identified by a unique IP address.
For our analysis, we filter out inactive users from our dataset

3.2

Search Sessions to Search Tasks

Search sessions have been exploited in previous work on
information search, as being the major focus for most analy-

1050

Society	  

Health	  

Kids	  

Kids	  

Arts	  

Arts	  

Home	  

Sports	  

Sports	  

Shopping	  

News	  
0	  

0.01	   0.02	   0.03	   0.04	   0.05	   0.06	   0.07	   0.08	   0.09	  

News	  
0.88	  

0.55	   0.56	   0.57	   0.58	   0.59	   0.6	   0.61	   0.62	   0.63	   0.64	   0.65	   0.66	  

Extent	  of	  Mul,tasking	  

0.9	  

Extent	  of	  Mul,tasking	  

(a) Focused: Multitasking

0.92	  

0.94	  

(b) Multitasker: Multitasking

Computers	  
Games	  
Adult	  
Arts	  

(c) Supertasker: : Multitasking

Games	  

Games	  

Computers	  

Computers	  

Adult	  

Home	  

Business	  
0	  

0.1	  

0.2	  

0.3	  

0.4	  

0.5	  

-­‐0.6	  

-­‐0.5	  

-­‐0.3	  

-­‐0.2	  

-­‐0.1	  

0	  

Extent	  of	  Single-­‐Tasking	  

Extent	  of	  Single-­‐Tasking	  

(d) Focused: Single-tasking

-­‐0.4	  

0.96	  

Extent	  of	  Mul,tasking	  

Business	  
-­‐0.86	  

-­‐0.84	  

-­‐0.82	  

-­‐0.8	  

-­‐0.78	  

-­‐0.76	  

-­‐0.74	  

Extent	  of	  Single-­‐Tasking	  

(e) Multitasker: Single-tasking

(f) Supertasker: Single-tasking

Figure 2: Top topics prone to multi-tasking (Top) and Single-tasking (Bottom) across different user groups.
sis of search behavior. The context of search activities within
the current session has been used to build richer models of
interests and improve how the search system interprets the
user’s current query. Session context has been used for modeling query and click sequences [4, 3], to disambiguate current search query [17], to build topical profiles for future
interest prediction [24], to improve search quality [25, 6]
to quantify struggling users [18], for understanding learning
and expertise development [8] and for detecting atypicality
in user behavior [7].
While search sessions are an important and convenient
source for analysis, we contend that this conceptualization of
sessions as focal units of analysis makes certain assumptions
that are quite untenable in the general case. First, there exists no theoretical basis for bounding search sessions, as it is
largely a data-driven subject. Previous research on the topic
have adopted a time-out based strategy to bound search sessions [5, 9, 20]. However, it remains to be understood if
such time-out based techniques have strong external validity across search contexts. Second, and most importantly,
evidence from our own analysis of search logs show that
users do indeed search for multiple unrelated topics within
a single search session. Based on the task extracted within
and across search sessions (3.1.2), our analysis hints at the
presence of multiple search tasks within single session. This
has been shown in Tables 1 and 2. In Table 2 we provide an
illustration of a single search session (tagged session ID = 1)
and the 2 different tasks that we have been able to identify
from within the search session. Further, we also list the ODP
topics that we could extract from the associated queries for
each of the tasks. Since search sessions are inherently complex and often comprise a combination of multiple search
tasks and topics, we shift our focus in the current study to
analyze user- and topic-level differences across search tasks
within and across sessions.

3.3

single search session [15]. Consistent with these studies, our
analysis also uncovers that close to 55% of users perform two
or more tasks within single sessions, with a minority of users
even performing 5 or more tasks within the single session,
as illustrated in Figure 1. Following Mehrotra et al. [15], we
term these three discernible classes of users based on their
frequency of multitasking behavior viz. focused (i.e. 1 task
per session), multitaskers (i.e. 2-5 tasks per session) and
supertaskers (i.e. >5 tasks per session). Having established
that users vary on their disposition to single-task and multitask, we now delve deeper into understanding whether users
multi-task to varying extents depending on their topics.
To obtain such a topic representation for this study, we
labeled each document with a vector of probabilities of categories from the top two levels of the ODP hierarchy using a text-based classifier. Each documents vector was restricted to the three most probable classes. The classifier
has a micro-averaged F1 value of 0.60 and is described more
fully in [24]. The most prominent topic among the top 3 returned results per query was used as the final tagged topic
for that query.
We analyse topic level heterogeneity by investigating the
level of multi-tasking in sessions filtered by topics. Our results are illustrated in Figure 2 wherein we highlight the
top 4 most prevalent topics across multi-tasking and singletasking sessions (top to bottom panels), for all three category of users (left to right panels). The length of the bars
in each of the charts in the Figure 2 highlights the extent
of multitasking (top panels) and the extent of single-tasking
(bottom panels). The extent of multi-tasking is defined as
NM −NS
, which measures the difference between the proNtotal
portion of times the topic featured in a multi-tasking session (NM ) and the proportion of times the topic featured
in a single-tasking session (NS ). Conversely, the extent of
single-tasking was calculated as the difference between the
proportion of times the topic featured in a single-tasking
session and the proportion of times the topic featured in a
multi-tasking session.
We find that focused users primarily multi-task for top-

User-disposition and Topic Level
Heterogeneity

Recent work on the topic of search multi-tasking has shown
that a majority of users perform two or more tasks within a

1051

Most Interested Topics
Least Interested Topics

Focused
Single-Tasking Multi-Tasking
0.593
0.407
0.458
0.542

Multi-taskers
Single-Tasking Multi-Tasking
0.310
0.690
0.249
0.751

Super-taskers
Single-Tasking Multi-Tasking
0.105
0.895
0.081
0.919

Table 3: Relating User’s Single/Multitasking Nature with their interest profiles.

5.

ics related to shopping, home, kids, health and recreation.
However, both multi- and super-taskers have a shared preference for multi-tasking on topics related to news, sports and
arts. We also observe that focused users prefer to single task
when searching for topics related to computers, games, adult
and arts categories, while multi-taskers and super-taskers do
not prefer to single-task when searching for their preferred
topics. This is reflected by the negative scores on the extent
of single-tasking in the bottom panel of Figure 2. These
findings confirm our intuition that indeed certain topics are
more prone to multi-tasking (e.g. news, sports) while others (e.g. computers, adult) usually witness single tasking
sessions.

3.4

User-interest Level Heterogeneity

We next investigate whether users exercise any specific
search preference when searching for topics that are of high
vs. low interest to them. To analyze this, we compute the
frequency of most and least searched topic categories from
the search history of users in each of the three user groups
viz. focused, multi-taskers and super-taskers 1 . Following
this, we analyze their search behavior during single-tasking
and multi-tasking sessions to investigate the distribution of
high and low interest topic categories across these sessions.
The results from this analysis are described in Table 3, and
highlight that users exercise distinct preferences in search
sessions for high vs. low interest topics.
Our results show that multi-taskers and super-taskers prefer to multi-task for a large majority of their search sessions
(i.e. almost always >70%), irrespective of whether they are
searching for high or low interest topics. In contrast, however, focused users prefer to search for high interest topics
in single-tasking sessions (i.e. 59% of the time), and low interest topics in multi-tasking sessions (i.e. 54% of the time).

4.

REFERENCES

[1] E. Agichtein, E. Brill, and S. Dumais. Improving web search
ranking by incorporating user behavior information. In SIGIR
2006.
[2] P. Bailey and Chen. User task understanding: a web search
engine perspective. In NII Shonan Meeting on Whole-Session
Evaluation of IIR Systems, 2012.
[3] H. Cao, D. H. Hu, D. Shen, D. Jiang, J.-T. Sun, E. Chen, and
Q. Yang. Context-aware query classification. In SIGIR 2009.
[4] H. Cao, D. Jiang, J. Pei, Q. He, Z. Liao, E. Chen, and H. Li.
Context-aware query suggestion by mining click-through and
session data. In KDD 2008.
[5] L. D. Catledge and J. E. Pitkow. Characterizing browsing
strategies in the world-wide web. Computer Networks and
ISDN systems, 1995.
[6] M. Daoud, L. Tamine-Lechani, M. Boughanem, and
B. Chebaro. A session based personalized search using an
ontological user profile. In Proceedings of the 2009 ACM
symposium on Applied Computing. ACM, 2009.
[7] C. Eickhoff, K. Collins-Thompson, P. N. Bennett, and
S. Dumais. Personalizing atypical web search sessions. In
WSDM 2013.
[8] C. Eickhoff, J. Teevan, R. White, and S. Dumais. Lessons from
the journey: A query log analysis of within-session learning. In
WSDM 2014.
[9] D. He, A. Göker, and D. J. Harper. Combining evidence for
automatic web session identification. Information Processing &
Management, 2002.
[10] J. Jiang, D. He, and J. Allan. Searching, browsing, and clicking
in a search session: changes in user behavior by task and over
time. In SIGIR 2014.
[11] R. Jones and K. L. Klinkner. Beyond the session timeout:
automatic hierarchical segmentation of search topics in query
logs. In CIKM 2008.
[12] Kotov, Bennett, White, Dumais, and Teevan. Modeling and
analysis of cross-session search tasks. In SIGIR 2011.
[13] L. Li, H. Deng, A. Dong, Y. Chang, and H. Zha. Identifying
and labeling search tasks via query-based hawkes processes. In
KDD 2014.
[14] C. Lucchese, S. Orlando, R. Perego, F. Silvestri, and
G. Tolomei. Identifying task-based sessions in search engine
query logs. In Proceedings of ACM WSDM 2011.
[15] R. Mehrotra, P. Bhattacharya, and E. Yilmaz. Characterizing
users’ multi-tasking behavior in web search. In Proceedings of
the 2016 ACM on Conference on Human Information
Interaction and Retrieval, 2016.
[16] R. Mehrotra and E. Yilmaz. Towards hierarchies of search tasks
& subtasks. In WWW 2015.
[17] L. Mihalkova and R. Mooney. Learning to disambiguate search
queries from short sessions. In Machine Learning and
Knowledge Discovery in Databases. 2009.
[18] D. Odijk, R. W. White, A. Hassan Awadallah, and S. T.
Dumais. Struggling and success in web search. In CIKM 2015.
[19] F. Radlinski and T. Joachims. Query chains: learning to rank
from implicit feedback. In KDD 2005.
[20] C. Silverstein, H. Marais, M. Henzinger, and M. Moricz.
Analysis of a very large web search engine query log. In ACm
SIGIR Forum, volume 33, pages 6–12. ACM, 1999.
[21] Spink, Koshman, Park, Field, and Jansen. Multitasking web
search on vivisimo. com. In ITCC 2005.
[22] A. Spink, M. Park, B. J. Jansen, and J. Pedersen. Multitasking
during web search sessions. Information Processing &
Management 2006.
[23] H. Wang, Y. Song, M.-W. Chang, X. He, R. W. White, and
W. Chu. Learning to extract cross-session search tasks. In
WWW 2013.
[24] White, Bennett, and Dumais. Predicting short-term interests
using activity-based search context. In CIKM 2010.
[25] B. Xiang, D. Jiang, J. Pei, X. Sun, E. Chen, and H. Li.
Context-aware ranking in web search. In SIGIR 2010.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

We illustrate in this paper how a shift of focus from the
idea of a search session to a search task raises a number
of important questions. The most important of these is
about fully characterizing the extent and underlying heterogeneities surrounding single-task and multi-task search
sessions. While we draw on previous work as well as our own
set of analyses to show that multi-tasking within a search
session is fairly common, we also emphasize that the extent and nature of multi-tasking is strongly influenced by
user dispositions (i.e. whether a user is naturally disposed
to single vs. multi-tasking), topic preferences (i.e. users
might prefer to multi-task when searching for certain topics than others), and interest preferences (i.e. users might
prefer to multi-task about topics they are more or less interested in. Our findings have implications for understanding
user preferences which in turn could impact the design of
better personalization services for searchers.
1

Note that this is different from the identification of top topics in the previous section which were identified at a sessionlevel and not at a user-level.

1052

