Using Word Embedding to Evaluate the Coherence of
Topics from Twitter Data
1

Anjie Fang1 , Craig Macdonald2 , Iadh Ounis2 , Philip Habel2

a.fang.1@research.gla.ac.uk, 2 {firstname.secondname}@glasgow.ac.uk
University of Glasgow, UK

ABSTRACT

large crowdsourcing study, Fang et al. [3] found that a PMIbased metric using a Twitter background dataset aligned
best with human preferences of topic coherence. However,
some challenges remain, particularly because of the uniqueness of Twitter data, where unlike many other corpora,
tweets contain abbreviations, several peculiarities (e.g. hashtags) and a vast vocabulary. For example, the PMI metric
leverages the co-occurrence data of approx. 354 million word
pairs [3], which is voluminous to store. Recently, Word Embedding (WE) has emerged as a more effective word representation than, among others, LSA [8, 9, 10]. Using WE
word representation models, scholars have improved the performance of classification [6], machine translation [16], and
other tasks. However, it remains to be seen whether Word
Embedding can be effectively used to evaluate the coherence
of topics in comparison with existing metrics.
In this paper, we propose a new Word Embedding-based
metric, which we instantiate using 8 different Word Embedding models (trained using different datasets and different parameters). We also use as baselines two types of
existing effective metrics based on PMI and LSA. We conduct a large-scale pairwise user study, comparing human
judgements with the 8 WE-based and the 4 PMI/LSA-based
baseline metrics. We generate the topic pairs using three
topic modelling approaches (i.e. LDA, Twitter LDA and
Pachinko Allocation Model ). First, we rank the topic modelling approaches using each of the deployed coherence metrics. Second, we assess the extent to which the topical preferences emanating from the 12 metrics align with human
assessments. Using two Twitter datasets, our results show
that the new Word Embedding-based metrics outperform
the PMI/LSA-based ones in capturing the coherence of topics in terms of robustness and efficientness.

Scholars often seek to understand topics discussed on Twitter using topic modelling approaches. Several coherence
metrics have been proposed for evaluating the coherence
of the topics generated by these approaches, including the
pre-calculated Pointwise Mutual Information (PMI) of word
pairs and the Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) word representation vectors. As Twitter data contains abbreviations
and a number of peculiarities (e.g. hashtags), it can be challenging to train effective PMI data or LSA word representation. Recently, Word Embedding (WE) has emerged as a
particularly effective approach for capturing the similarity
among words. Hence, in this paper, we propose new Word
Embedding-based topic coherence metrics. To determine
the usefulness of these new metrics, we compare them with
the previous PMI/LSA-based metrics. We also conduct a
large-scale crowdsourced user study to determine whether
the new Word Embedding-based metrics better align with
human preferences. Using two Twitter datasets, our results
show that the WE-based metrics can capture the coherence
of topics in tweets more robustly and efficiently than the
PMI/LSA-based ones.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Topic modelling approaches can be used by scholars to
capture the topics discussed in various corpora, including
news articles, books [5] and tweets [4, 15]. Since typically
for such scenarios no ground-truth exists to determine how
well the topic modelling approach works, a number of topic
coherence metrics have been proposed to assess the performance of the topic modelling approaches in extracting comprehensible and coherent topics from corpora. These metrics
often capture the semantic similarity of words in a topic using external sources such as Wikipedia or WordNet.
To evaluate the coherence of a topic, a coherence metric
averages the semantic similarity of words in topics. Recently,
two effective coherence metrics, namely the Pointwise Mutual Information (PMI)-based [11] of word pairs and the Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) word representation-based [3]
metrics, have been adapted to tweet corpora [3]. Through a

2.

BACKGROUND & RELATED WORK

In this paper, we use three topic modelling approaches to
generate topics for Twitter data. They have been chosen
because of their reasonable computational cost and scalability on high volumes of tweets. First, we use LDA [2], where
each of K topics is represented by a term distribution φ,
while each document has a topic distribution θ. Second, we
experiment with an extension of LDA, the Pachinko Allocation Model (PAM) [7]. The topic layer in PAM is divided
into a super-topic layer (distribution over sub-topics) and a
sub-topic layer (distribution over terms). Third, we use a
topic modelling approach tailored to tweet corpora, namely
Twitter LDA (TLDA) [15], where a Bernoulli distribution is
estimated and used to control the selection between “real”
terms and background terms. PAM and TLDA are known

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.

SIGIR ’16, July 17-21, 2016, Pisa, Italy
c 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2914729

1057

to generate more coherent topics than LDA on news corpora
and tweets, respectively [7, 15].
There are two main existing types of effective topic coherence metrics. One metric, Pointwise Mutual Information
(PMI), developed by Newman et al. [11], captures the semantic similarity of pairs of words in a topic, by examining how the word pairs co-occur in external sources such as
Wikipedia. PMI has been tested on news articles and books.
Fang et al. [3] showed that the PMI metric deployed using
Twitter background datasets was closest to human judgements. Moreover, they also adapted a second type of metric,
the LSA word representation metric, to evaluate the coherence of topics. The LSA-based coherence metric proved to
be less aligned with human assessments than the PMI-based
one on tweet corpora.
Turning to Word Embedding approaches, recently scholars have applied Feed-Forward Neural Network (FFNN) for
Word Embeddings [1]. In this approach, similar to LSA,
a word is represented as a continuous vector in a Word
Embedding model. Based on FFNN, Mikolov et al. [8, 9]
proposed a skip-gram model to generate Word Embeddings
from large datasets more efficiently and effectively. Godin
et al. [6] improved the performance of document classification via Word Embeddings. Indeed, Neural Networks were
shown to generate more effective word representations than
LSA [10]. Therefore, in this paper, we propose new Word
Embedding-based metrics to capture the coherence of topics. We adopt the skip-gram approach to obtain our Word
Embedding models. In the next section, we explain how we
deploy the PMI, LSA, and WE-based metrics.

3.

WE metric. Recently, as highlighted above, Word Embeddings have been shown to produce more effective word
representations than LSA. Hence, we propose the use of WE
vectors Vwi , obtained from a pre-trained Word Embedding
model on a large text dataset. If two words are semantically
similar, the cosine similarity – as per Equation (3) – of their
word vectors is higher. We describe how we train the Word
Embedding models in Section 5.
We use the methodology explained in Section 4 to examine
whether the WE-based metric can capture the coherence of
topics from tweets, and how well WE, PMI, and LSA metrics
compare with human judgements.

4.

COHERENCE METRICS

We use three types of coherence metrics for Twitter data
based on PMI and LSA, and Word Embeddings (WE), which
are instantiated into 12 metrics. We first define the existing
PMI & LSA-based metrics before introducing the new Word
Embedding-based metric to evaluate the coherence of topics.
PMI & LSA metrics. A topic t can be represented by the
top n = 10 words ({w1 , w2 , ..., w10 }) (selected by their probabilities (p(w|z)) in Φ for this topic). The coherence of a
topic can be calculated by averaging the semantic similarity
of pairs of words associated with that topic (Equation (1)).
Both Newman et al. [11] and Fang et al. [3] showed that the
PMI of pairs of words can capture the coherence of topics
identified from both standard and tweet corpora. In particular, for the PMI metric, Equation (2) is used to measure the
similarity of word wi and wj based on co-occurrence statistics obtained from a background corpus (e.g. Wikipedia or
a large sample of tweets - detailed in Section 5) along with
Equation (1). Note that the PMIs of word pairs need to be
pre-calculated from these external datasets.
Pn Pn
1
Coherence(t) = Pn−1
(1)
i=1
j=i+1 fss (wi , wj )
m

closesttT1 = argmaxi<K (cosine(VtT1 , VtT2 ))

(4)
i
j
j
A given coherence metric generates a coherence score for
each topic in a topic pair. Thus for each comparison unit,
we have a group of data pairs. We then apply the Wilcoxon
signed-rank test to compute the statistical significance level
of the difference between the two sets of data sampled in
order to determine the better topic model between the two
approaches utilised (e.g. TLDA > LDA). Therefore the outcomes of three comparison units gives the performance ranking order of the three topic modelling approaches. For instance, we obtain the ranking order LDA(1st )>TLDA(2nd )
>PAM(3rd ) from LDA>TLDA, LDA>PAM & TLDA>PAM.
Similar to Fang et al., we do not observe a Condorcet paradox (e.g. TLDA>LDA, LDA>PAM & PAM>TLDA) in our
experiments. Turning to our user study, a topic receives a
vote if it is preferred by a human. Using the vote fraction
of topics, we can also obtain an ordering of the three topic
modelling approaches, i.e. the human ground-truth ranking.
Comparison of Coherence Metrics. A good metric
should rank the three topic modelling approaches in a high

m=1

p(w ,w )

i
j
fss (wi , wj ) = P M I(wi , wj ) = log p(wi )×p(w
j)

(2)

LSA can also be used to capture the semantic similarity
of word pairs [13]. In applying LSA, each word is represented by a dense vector in the reduced LSA space, Vmi ,
obtained by applying Singular Value Decomposition on a
background corpus. Therefore, the LSA metric determines
the similarity of two words by measuring the distance between the vectors of the words using a cosine function, by
replacing Equation (2) in Equation (1) with:
fss (wi , wj ) = cosine(Vwi , Vwj )

EVALUATION METHODOLOGY

We follow Fang et al. [3], and adopt a pairwise user study
to gather human preferences to evaluate the effectiveness of
the aforementioned metrics. Since it is difficult for humans
to generate graded coherence scores of topics, we select a
pairwise study, where a human is asked to choose which of
two topics is more coherent. For our study, we first generate topic pairs using the three topic modelling approaches:
LDA, PAM, and TLDA. We then determine whether the
metrics can accurately identify the more coherent topics
compared with human coherence assessments.
Ground Truth Generation. We use pairwise comparisons for the three topic modelling approaches, specifically:
LDA vs. TLDA, LDA vs. PAM and TLDA vs. PAM. Each
comparison unit consists of a certain number of topic pairs,
where each pair contains a topic from topic models T1 and
T2 , respectively. Note that T1 and T2 are generated using
any two topic modelling approaches among the three. In the
pairwise user study, a human is asked to choose the more
coherent topic among two topics presented in a given topic
pair. For ease of assessment, we present the human with
two similar topics in a topic pair. We first randomly select
a number of topics from the topic model T1 . For each selected topic, we use Equation (4) to select its closest topic
in T2 , where Vt is a vector representation using the term
distribution of topic t. The selected topic pair is denoted as
Pair(T1 → T2 ). Similarly, we also generate the same number
of Pair(T2 → T1 ) for the comparison unit (T1 , T2 ). Hence,
for each comparison unit, we obtain a set of topic pairs. For
example, we generate Pairs(LDA→TLDA & TLDA→LDA)
for the comparison unit (LDA, TLDA).

(3)

1058

cording to [15]. Since the NYJ dataset contains many topics
given the length of time and the fact that journalists discuss
many issues, we use a high number of topics, K = 100. On
the other hand, because the TVD dataset covers only one debate and the accompanying 2 hours’ tweets, we use a smaller
number of topic, K = 30. Each topic modelling approach
is repeated 5 times. Therefore, for each topic modelling
approach, we obtain 500 (150) topics in the NYJ (TVD)
dataset, respectively. We use the methodology described in
Section 4 to generate 100 topic pairs for each comparison
unit. In total, we obtain 600 topic pairs from the two used
Twitter datasets. In Section 6, we explain how we perform
the pairwise user study using these 600 topic pairs.

Table 1: Two used Twitter datasets.
Name

Time Period

Users#

Tweets#

(1) NYJ
(2) TVD

20/05/2015-19/08/2015
8pm-10pm 02/04/2015

2,853
121,594

946,006
343,511

agreement with humans. First, the three topic modelling
approaches are ranked using each of the deployed coherence
metrics. Second, the rankings are compared to the rankings
from the generated ground-truth to identify which of the
metrics agree most with the human assessments.

5.

DATASETS & EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

Datasets. In this paper, we use the same two Twitter datasets from [3]. The first dataset1 is comprised of the
tweets of 2,852 newspaper journalists in the US state of New
York posted from 20 May 2015 to 19 August 2015, denoted
here as NYJ. The second dataset consists of tweets related
to the first TV political leaders debate during the UK General Election held in April 2015, denoted as TVD2 . Details
of these two datasets are shown in Table 1.
Metrics Setup. We deploy 12 coherence metrics in total,
which are implemented by two external sources: Wikipedia
and a separate background Twitter dataset. The background
Twitter dataset, which is also identical to the one used in [3],
represents 1%-5% random tweets crawled from 01 Jan 2015
to 30 June 2015. Following [3], we remove stopwords, terms
occurring in less than 20 tweets, and the retweets. The remaining tweets (30,151,847) are used to pre-calculate the
PMI data, LSA word representation, and the WE models.
The setup of the 12 metrics is described below:
Existing PMI/LSA metrics (4). We use the LSA word representation (1M tokens) and the PMI data (179M word pairs)
from the SEMILAR 3 platform to implement the Wikipedia
PMI/LSA-based metrics (W-PMI/W-LSA). For the Twitter PMI/LSA-based metrics (T-PMI/T-LSA), the Twitter
background data contains 609k tokens and 354M word pairs.
WE metrics using GloV e (4). These metrics are instantiated using Word Embedding models from Wikipedia4 and
Twitter, pre-trained using the GloV e [12] tool. The metrics
are denoted as G-W-WEd={200,300} and G-T-WEd={100,200} ,
respectively, where d = 100 means that the size of word vectors in the WE model is 100.
WE metrics using word2vec (4). These metrics use Word
Embedding models newly trained using the separate Twitter
background dataset, but making use of the word2vec 5 tool.
We denote the coherence metrics using our newly trained
w={1,3}
WE models (504K tokens) as T-WEd={200,500} , where w is
the size of the context window size in the trained models.
We noticed that the unstemmed WE word representation
performs poorly in our experiments. Hence, we stem the
words in our 4 newly trained (word2vec) WE models. Note
that the WE models of GloV e are not stemmed. We chose to
use WE models with different pre-set parameters (e.g. context window and vector size) as we wish to examine whether
these parameters affect the coherence evaluation task.
Topic Pairs Setup. Mallet6 and Twitter LDA7 are used
to implement the three topic modelling approaches for the
two Twitter datasets. The LDA parameters α and β are set
to 50/K and 0.01 according to [14], and for TLDA γ = 20 ac-

6.

PAIRWISE USER STUDY

We now describe how we use CrowdFlower8 workers to
perform the topic preference task while ensuring job quality.
Job Description. We show a CrowdFlower worker the
top 10 words (ranked by their probabilities in a topic) of 2
topics in a topic pair, and the 3 most retweeted tweets in
these 2 topics. We ask the workers to select the more coherent topic among the two presented using these 10 words. We
describe a more coherent topic as one that is less mixed and
that can be easily interpreted. The workers are instructed
to take into account: 1) the number of semantically similar words (e.g. Knicks & basketball) among the 10 shown
words, 2) whether the presented words suggest a mixed topic
(i.e. more than one discussion) and 3) whether the displayed
words gives more information about a discussion. To reach
a decision, a worker can also use three associated tweets for
the two topics. We give two rules for using these tweets:
1) whether the 10 shown words are reflected by their tweets
and 2) whether these tweets are related with the two topics.
We collect 5 judgements from 5 different workers for each
topic pair. For each judgement, we paid a worker $0.05.
Quality Control. To ensure quality control, only those
workers who passed a test were allowed to enter the topic
preference task. For the test, we choose a number of topic
pairs. The topic preference of the selected topic pairs were
verified in advance, and they were used to set the test questions for the quality control. The worker must have maintained more than 70% accuracy on the test questions through
the whole task, otherwise their judgements were nullified.
Overall, we used 168 trusted workers for this user study.

7.

RESULTS

We first demonstrate whether the 12 used coherence metrics can differentiate the three topic modelling approaches in
comparison with human assessments. We also show whether
they can distinguish the more coherent topic from a topic
pair in a manner similar to that of humans.
The column “Ranking Order Matching” in Table 2 shows
the extent to which the ranking order of the 12 metrics exactly or partially matches that of human judgements for our
two Twitter datasets. The human ground-truth ranking order is LDA1st >TLDA2nd >PAM3rd for the NYJ dataset,
and TLDA1st >LDA2nd/3rd >PAM2nd/3rd for the TVD one.
If there are no significant differences between two topic modelling approaches, they share the same rank in the table. If
a metric receives a ranking such as LDA1st >TLDA2nd/3rd
>PAM2nd/3rd in the NYJ dataset, we say that the ranking
order partially matches the human ground-truth one.
We find, first, that the PMI-based metrics differentiate
the three topic modelling approaches very well, with the ex-

1

This dataset was collected by tracking the journalists’ Twitter handles using Twitter Stream2
ing API.
Collected by searching for debate-related hashtags using the Twitter Streaming API
3
4
semanticsimilarity.org
It also contains English Gi5
gaword V5.
deeplearning4j.org 6 mallet.cs.umass.edu
7
github.com/minghui/Twitter-LDA

8

1059

crowdflower.com

few hundreds millions of word pairs, the WE-based metrics
use only a few hundred thousand (the size of vocabulary)
words’ vectors. Moreover, since skip gram is highly parallelizable, it is much faster to train a WE model than an
LSA one [6]. Hence, we conclude that the WE-based metrics are more robust, efficient, and practical to use than the
PMI/LSA-based ones.

Table 2: The matching of the ranking order of the
three topic modelling approaches from each metric
and from humans, and the agreement of the topic
preferences between each metric and humans.
Metrics
(1) T-PMI
(2) W-PMI
(3) T-LSA
(4) W-LSA
(5) G-T-WEd=100
(6) G-T-WEd=200
(7) G-W-WEw=10
d=200
(8) G-W-WEw=10
d=300
(9) T-WEw=1
d=200
(10) T-WEw=1
d=500
(11) T-WEw=3
d=200
(12) T-WEw=3
d=500

Ranking Order Matching

Preferences Agreement

NYJ

TVD

NYJ

TVD

4
4
6
=
6
6
6
=
=
=
=
=

4
=
6
=
6
6
6
6
=
=
=
=

75.7%s
65.5%s
47.6%
61.3%s
44.6%
48.0%
48.0%
50.6%
65.3%s
66.7%s
64.3%s
70.7%s

51.0%
56.0%
46.6%
47.3%
39.3%
39.3%
43.3%
46.0%
60.3%s
60.0%s
61.0%s
61.0%s

8.

CONCLUSIONS

We proposed a new Word Embedding-based topic coherence metric, and instantiated it using 8 different WE models.
To identify the usefulness of these WE-based metrics, we
conducted a large-scale pairwise user study to gauge human
preferences. We examined which of the 8 WE-based metrics
and the 4 existing PMI/LSA-based metrics align best with
human assessments. We found that the WE-based metrics
can effectively capture the coherence of topics from tweets.
In addition, they performed more robustly and more efficiently than the PMI/LSA-based metrics. In future work,
we will explore how the Word Embedding training parameters affect the coherence evaluation task.

“4”/“=” means that the ranking order from a metric exactly/partly matches that from human judgements.
“6”
indicates that the ranking order from a metric does not match
that from human judgements or the metric cannot give a
significant ranking order. “s” represents that a metric have a
high agreement (≥ 60%) with humans.

9.

REFERENCES

[1] Y. Bengio, R. Ducharme, P. Vincent, and C. Janvin. A
neural probabilistic language model. The Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 3, 2003.
[2] D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan. Latent dirichlet
allocation. the Journal of machine Learning research,
3:993–1022, 2003.
[3] A. Fang, C. Macdonald, I. Ounis, and P. Habel. Topics in
tweets: A user study of topic coherence metrics for Twitter
data. In Proc. of ECIR, 2016.
[4] A. Fang, I. Ounis, P. Habel, C. Macdonald, and
N. Limsopatham. Topic-centric classification of Twitter
user’s political orientation. In Proc. of SIGIR, 2015.
[5] T. L. Griffiths and M. Steyvers. Finding scientific topics. In
Proc. of NAS, 2004.
[6] R. Lebret and R. Collobert. N-gram-based low-dimensional
representation for document classification. In Proc. of
ICLP, 2015.
[7] W. Li and A. McCallum. Pachinko allocation:
DAG-structured mixture models of topic correlations. In
Proc. of ICML, 2006.
[8] T. Mikolov, K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean. efficient
estimation of word representations in vector space. In Proc.
of ICLR workshop, 2013.
[9] T. Mikolov, I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. S. Corrado, and
J. Dean. Distributed representations of words and phrases
and their compositionality. In Proc. of NIPS, 2013.
[10] T. Mikolov, W. Yih, and G. Zweig. Linguistic regularities
in continuous space word representations. In Proc. of
HLT-NAACL, 2013.
[11] D. Newman, J. H. Lau, K. Grieser, and T. Baldwin.
Automatic evaluation of topic coherence. In Proc. of
NAACL, 2010.
[12] J. Pennington, R. Socher, and C. D. Manning. GloVe:
Global vectors for word representation. In Proc. of
EMNLP, 2014.
[13] G. Recchia and M. N. Jones. More data trumps smarter
algorithms: Comparing pointwise mutual information with
latent semantic analysis. Behavior research methods,
41:647–656, 2009.
[14] M. Steyvers and T. Griffiths. Probabilistic topic models.
Handbook of latent semantic analysis, 427:424–440, 2007.
[15] W. X. Zhao, J. Jiang, J. Weng, J. He, E.-P. Lim, H. Yan,
and X. Li. Comparing Twitter and traditional media using
topic models. In Proc. of ECIR, 2011.
[16] W. Y. Zou, R. Socher, D. M. Cer, and C. D. Manning.
Bilingual word embeddings for phrase-based machine
translation. In Proc. of EMNLP, 2013.

ception of the W-PMI metric in the TVD dataset, whose
ranking order only partially matches the ground-truth order. Second, all of our WE-based metrics using our trained
WE models partially match the ground-truth ranking order.
This finding indicates that the WE-based metrics have the
ability to differentiate the three topic modelling approaches
comparably to humans. However, the WE-based metrics using the GloV e pre-trained models do not differentiate well
between the modelling approaches. One possible reason is
that the words in those WE models are not stemmed. The
coherence metric focuses on capturing the semantic similarity between words rather than their syntax. The other
possible reason is that words on Twitter are different from
the words in Wikipedia, as tweets contain abbreviations,
misspellings and hashtags. Moreover, if the time period of
the Twitter background dataset does not match that of the
testing datasets form which we extract the topics, then the
trained WE models may not adequately capture the semantic similarity of words, as is likely the case for GloV e.
The column “Preference Agreement” in Table 2 lists the
agreement rate on choosing the preferred topics from 300
topic pairs in the two Twitter datasets between each metric
and humans. As there are three options (“Topic 1”, “Topic
2” and “No preference”) in the topic preference task, the
baseline agreement rate is 33.3%. We obverse that the WEbased metrics using our trained WE models have consistently high agreement rates across both datasets. In addition, while most of the metrics do not perform well on the
TVD dataset, the WE-based metrics using our trained WE
models have the hignest agreement with humans. We also
find that a slightly higher dimension and context window
are likely to get a better agreement rate, such as T-WEw=3
500 .
It is interesting to note that unlike the newly trained WE
models, the WE-based metric using WE models from GloV e
do not have a high agreement with humans.
In summary, the WE-based metrics can effectively capture
the coherence of topics from tweets, with a high agreement
with humans. The WE-based metrics perform more robustly
across the two Twitter datasets. Besides, the WE based
metrics have an additional important benefit. In contrast to
the PMI-based coherence that leverages the PMI data of a

1060

