Analysing Temporal Evolution of
Interlingual Wikipedia Article Pairs
Simon Gottschalk

Elena Demidova

L3S Research Center
Hannover, Germany

Web and Internet Science Group, ECS
University of Southampton, UK

gottschalk@L3S.de

e.demidova@soton.ac.uk

ABSTRACT

editions at a time could originate from one of the language
editions and be adapted from the other article with some
delay.
Our methods aim at supporting Wikipedia editors and
readers in better understanding of how such changes propagate across the language editions. To this extent, we measure the similarity of the interlingual article snapshots at
different time points and visualise them on a timeline.
Figure 1 gives an example of such a timeline generated
by our tool, MultiWiki, for the English/German article pair
“Codex Aureus of St. Emmeram”, which visualises the following process: The English article was created in October
2003, nearly five years before the German one and consisted
of a very few sentences for a long time. Then, in 2008, the
German article was created and became immediately much
longer than the English one. Hence, the timeline shows a
very small similarity within the first two years after the creation of the German article. Then, parts of the German
texts were adapted to enlarge the English article, which lead
to a significant increase of their interlingual similarity. Finally, the texts evolved independently from each other and
their similarity slightly decreased.
For each particular pair of snapshots derived from the
timeline, our interface also provides a detailed comparison.
This comparison clearly goes beyond existing tools (e.g. [1],
[3]), in particular through visualising a detailed comparison
of the similarities and differences of the article texts.
MultiWiki presented in this demonstration is a web-based
tool1 including the following functionalities:

Wikipedia articles representing an entity or a topic in different language editions evolve independently within the scope
of the language-specific user communities. This can lead
to different points of views reflected in the articles, as well
as complementary and inconsistent information. An analysis of how the information is propagated across the Wikipedia language editions can provide important insights in
the article evolution along the temporal and cultural dimensions and support quality control. To facilitate such analysis, we present MultiWiki – a novel web-based user interface
that provides an overview of the similarities and differences
across the article pairs originating from different language
editions on a timeline. MultiWiki enables users to observe
the changes in the interlingual article similarity over time
and to perform a detailed visual comparison of the article
snapshots at a particular time point.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Wikipedia is a rich interlingual information source that often reflects cultural differences: Wikipedia articles describing real-world entities, topics, events and concepts evolve
independently in different language editions, as there is no
sophisticated support for multilingual collaboration when
writing articles. Moreover, there is a social impact on multilingual article creation, as different communities of Wikipedia editors vary in their perception of the topics they are
describing. As a result, there is a distributed evolution of
Wikipedia articles that leads to semantic differences representing linguistic points of view on particular topics [3], as
well as complementary or sometimes contradictory information between articles.
The temporal evolution of Wikipedia articles plays an important role when analysing the interlingual development
of articles: For example, multilingual users actively transfer
information from one language edition to others [4] and articles may be translated to complement missing information.
Likewise, information on events impacting both language

• Computation of the interlingual similarity between the
articles in an interlingual article pair. The features
for this similarity computation include the similarity
of the article texts, their media elements, entities and
links, as well as Wikipedia editors and their locations;
• Tracking the changes of the interlingual similarity over
time and visualisation of the similarity and its features
on a timeline, tables and maps; and
• Visualisation of the textual similarities of an interlingual article pair given their snapshots.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.

These functions enable MultiWiki to: 1) Present an overview
of the evolution of the interlingual article similarity over
time; and 2) Enable users to perform a detailed article comparison at a certain time point.

SIGIR ’16, July 17 - 21, 2016, Pisa, Italy
c 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ISBN 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07. . . $15.00

1
The demo is publicly available at: http://multiwiki.l3s.
uni-hannover.de/demo.html.

DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2911472

1089

10

100

7.5

75

Edits

May 15: 41.633%
5

50

2.5

25

0

Similarity (%)

Similarity

0
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

Date
English Article

German Article

Similarity

Figure 1: Timeline of the German/English article pair “Codex Aureus of St. Emmeram”. The number of
edits per article and the similarity of the article snapshots are plotted over time.

2.

FEATURES & INTERFACE

pair is the weighted sum of Simtext and Simmeta , where we
set α = 0.5 to balance the influence of both factor types:

MultiWiki provides users with an overview of how the
relation between two articles that describe the same topic
in different languages changes over time. To this extent,
MultiWiki automatically generates a timeline that visualises
the evolution of the semantic similarity of the articles over
time and the corresponding number of edits for both articles.
In order to visualise this timeline and to enable a more
fine-grained analysis of an article pair at a particular time
point, we compute a semantic similarity score Sim(A1 , A2 )
for two article snapshots A1 and A2 from different Wikipedia language editions. This score is composed of several
similarity functions Simf (A1 , A2 ) ∈ [0, 1] that are applied
on different features f ∈ F .
We differentiate between the text-based features (Ftext )
and features using meta information like images and links
(Fmeta ). The textual similarity Simtext between two article
snapshots A1 and A2 is computed as follows, where wf denotes the weight assigned to one of the similarity functions:
Simtext (A1 , A2 ) =

X
f ∈Ftext

wf ·Simf (A1 , A2 ),

X

Sim(A1 , A2 ) = α·Simtext (A1 , A2 )+(1−α)·Simmeta (A1 , A2 ).
In the following, we describe the features, the similarity
functions based on them and how we present the results
to the user: Our interface does not only show the numeric
similarity scores, but also visualises the similarities based on
particular features as illustrated in Figures 2 and 4.

Images
When comparing two Wikipedia articles, one of the main
visual impressions is given by the images placed in them.
Therefore, we compute the fraction of images used in both
articles. In the interface, we oppose them in a table like the
one shown in Figure 2(a).

External Links
Motivated by the findings in [4], MultiWiki aligns external
links mentioned in the footnotes of the articles and their
hosts. As illustrated in Figure 2(b), the host names of the
external links are shown to the user ranked by their overlap
frequency. Those at the top are frequently mentioned in
both articles and are therefore good indicators for the topical
overlap of the articles.

wf = 1.

f ∈Ftext

Simmeta , the similarity of the article snapshots computed
using meta information, is defined analogously. We consider
different feature categories, such as images, Wikipedia annotations (i.e. references to other Wikipedia articles in the
text), external links and editors to be equally important.
Therefore, we equally distribute the weights across these
feature categories. Tables 1 and 2 provide an overview of
the MultiWiki features and their weights.
The overall similarity Sim(A1 , A2 ) ∈ [0, 1] of a snapshot
Name
Images
Wikipedia annotations
External links
External
links
(Hosts)
Editors
Editors (Locations)

Description
Overlap of images in the articles
Overlap of Wikipedia annotations extracted from the articles
Overlap of footnote links
Overlap of the host names of footnote
links
Overlap of editors
Overlap of the editors’ countries

Wikipedia Links and Annotations
Two articles are similar if they refer to the same entities,
concepts and topics [3]. To extract this kind of annotations, we rely on two sources: (1) Wikipedia links manually
added to articles by Wikipedia editors; and (2) Wikipedia
links automatically created by applying an entity annotation tool (DBpedia Spotlight). While the user-defined links
are precise, but rather sparse and without repetitions, the
automatic annotation raises the recall of the Wikipedia ref-

wf
1/4
1/4
1/8
1/8

Name
Text length
Text overlap
Text
passage
coverage

1/8
1/8

Table 1: Similarity Measures based on Meta Features

Description
Proportion of the number of characters
Jaccard overlap of the English texts
Percentage of characters that have been
aligned with the other article

Table 2: Textual Similarity Measures

1090

wf
1/3
1/3
1/3

English Article

(a) Images

(b) Links (Host Names)

(c) Editor Locations

Figure 2: Selected Feature Similarities for the English/German article pair on “Lawrence Eagleburger”
erences. These references are aligned across languages by
using interlingual article links provided by Wikipedia.

tors representing text passages using terms (automatically
translated to English); (2) Similarity of the Wikipedia entities metioned in the sentences; (3) Time similarity using
temporal expressions automatically extracted from the sentences. Consequently, sentence pairs whose similarity score
exceeds a pre-determined threshold value are merged in a
bottom-up manner: As long as the similarity of an aligned
text passage pair increases, the text passage is expanded by
adding neighboured sentences from one of the articles or by
merging two text passage pairs in a close neighbourhood.
Given the aligned text passages, they are presented to the
user by showing both articles side by side and connecting
them as illustrated in Figure 4. With this visualisation approach, the user immediately obtaines an overview of the
similarities and differences in the articles.

Wikipedia Editors
Wikipedia articles are thoroughly based on the input of the
Wikipedia editors. Some multilingual editors tend to edit articles describing the same entity in different languages, such
that similar content is spread across languages [4]. MultiWiki
computes the overlap of the editors that contributed to the
articles under comparison. Furthermore, the linguistic point
of view (as defined in [3]) emphasises the cultural differences between language communities. Therefore, we determine the countries where anonymous editors come from and
compute the similarity of the country distribution per article. As this location similarity Simloc ought to measure the
similarity of the distribution, but should not be biased by
differences in the number of anonymous editors, it is computed by Equation 2 (where L is the set of locations and
each article Ai is assigned a set of editors e ∈ Ei ): Before
computing the overlap, the number of editors is matched by
1|
.
multiplying E2 by |E
|E2 |
Simloc (A1 , A2 ) =
P
min(|{e ∈ E1 |e.loc = l}|, |{e ∈ E2 |e.loc = l}| ·
l∈L

Textual Similarity
Regarding the textual similarity score of an article pair
Simtext (A1 , A2 ), three measures are derived from the article texts: 1) Text passage coverage is the percentage of text
aligned as part of text passage pairs; 2) Text length similarity compares the length of the articles; and 3) Text overlap
similarity is the Jaccard similarity of the English (machinetranslated) texts.

|E1 |
)
|E2 |

3.

|E1 |

SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE & PIPELINE

In order to facilitate the comparison of articles based on
the proposed features and to analyse their temporal evolution, each article pair runs through a preprocessing pipeline.
In a first step, we need to inspect the revision history in both
languages to create a set of article snapshots pairs that fulfils the following condition: Both snapshots in an article pair
must have been on-line at the same time. This ensures that
dissimilarities between the articles are not based on temporal shifts. Besides, the selected article pairs should be evenly
distributed over time to provide a better overview.
For each article snapshot, we collect meta information,
extract the sentences and annotate them with the features

In the MultiWiki interface, two world maps like the one
presented in Figure 2(c) are showing the editors’ origins for
a pair of article snapshots.

Textual Overlap
MultiWiki provides a fine-grained comparison of the article
texts by aligning semantically similar text passages in an
article pair as illustrated in Figure 4.
This alignment is facilitated by an bottom-up approach:
At first, sentences with overlapping information are aligned
using the following features: (1) Cosine similarity of the vec-

Figure 3: Processing Pipeline for a Wikipedia Article

1091

May 6, 1995, he delivered the commencement address to the 1995
graduating class of James Madison University
. [5 ]

1957 trat er in den amerikanischen Auswärtigen Dienst ein, wo er auf
verschiedenen Posten in Botschaften, Konsulaten und im State

He was also a member of the Board of Visitors at the College of
William and Mary.

Departement tätig war. Zwischen 1961 und 1965 war er als Mitarbeiter der US-Botschaft in Belgrad (Jugoslawien) tätig.

Eagleburger also served in the United States Army (1952–1954),
attaining the rank of First Lieutenant.

1969 wurde er in der Regierung von Präsident Richard Nixon als
Assistent des Nationalen Sicherheitsberaters Henry Kissinger tätig.
Bis 1971 blieb er auf diesem Posten, danach übernahm er

He had three sons, all of whom are named Lawrence Eagleburger,
though they have different middle names.[2] The eldest is from his first
marriage, which ended in divorce. The other two are from his second

verschiedene Positionen einschließlich jener des Beraters der USGesandtschaft bei der NATO in Brüssel.

marriage, which was to Marlene Heinemann from 1966 until her death

Als Kissinger zum Außenminister berufen wurde, folgte ihm
Eagleburger auf eine Reihe weiterer Posten im State Departement.

in 2010.[6]

Eagleburger galt als ein Vertrauter und Protegées von Henry
Kissinger .[3]

Governmental career

Nach Nixons Rücktritt verließ er die Regierung, wurde aber schnell
von Präsident Carter zum Botschafter der Vereinigten Staaten in
Jugoslawien berufen, eine Position, die er zwischen 1977 und 1980
innehatte. Von Mai 1981 bis Januar 1982 war er Unterstaatssekretär

In 1957, Eagleburger joined the United States Foreign Service, and
served in various posts in embassies, consulates, and the Department of State. From 1961 to 1965 he served as a staffer at the U.S.

für Europafragen(Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs);
sein Nachfolger auf diesem Posten wurde Richard Burt.

Embassy in Belgrade, Yugoslavia.
He was known as the person who handled the Skopje 1963

Figure 4: Text Comparison. The English article on “Lawrence Eagleburger” is on the left, the German one
on the right. Aligned passages are marked green and connected with matching passages in the other article.
presented in Section 2 using state-of-the-art methods. The
pipeline for extraction and annotation is depicted in Figure
3. At first, we fetch the texts of each article and collect its
contributing editors from the revision history. For each of
the unregistered, anonymous editors, the IP address is provided, which makes it possible to determine their country.
To allow for the text passage alignment, the text is split into
sentences; then the features needed for the sentence alignment are collected. The results of the preprocessing pipeline
are stored in a database. Additionally, the complete set of
interlingual Wikipedia links is stored, such that the final
comparison of the article pair including the computation of
similarity values and the text passage alignment can be performed at run time.

4.

Two of the few existing tools to support cross-lingual analytics in Wikipedia are Manypedia [3] that provides an automatic translation to English, article statistics and overlap
of Wikipedia links, and Omnipedia [1], which can be used
to compare the given Wikipedia links for up to 25 language
editions simultaneously. Another tool that helps to explore
the temporal development of a single article is Contropedia
[2] that focusses on the interaction of Wikipedia editors. Unlike existing tools, MultiWiki excibits unique features such
as temporal analysis of interlingual article similarity and detailed textual comparison of article snapshots.

6.

DATASET

To facilitate the demonstration of our methods, we extracted a set of 79 randomly selected article pairs to be investigated using MultiWiki. For each article pair, we collected
eight snapshot pairs on average. The majority of 54 article pairs is German/English, 14 are Dutch/English and the
remaining 11 pairs are Portuguese/English. As we extract
multiple snapshots of each article to construct the timelines,
a total of 637 snapshot pairs has been extracted and annotated. Among these article pairs, there is the politician
“Lawrence Eagleburger”, the German film “Der Stern von
Afrika” (movie) and the “General Post Office”.

5.

CONCLUSIONS

In this paper we presented MultiWiki – a novel user interface to conduct a detailed visual analysis of the similarities and the differences across the Wikipedia articles on
the same topic written in different languages. MultiWiki
provides means to explore how information is propagated
across the language editions by observing how the similarity
of an article pair evolves over time. Moreover, it enables
a detailed visual comparison of the article snapshots based
on users, media elements, entities, and links as well as a
detailed analysis of textual similarities.

7.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was partially funded by the ERC under ALEXANDRIA (ERC 339233) and H2020-MSCA-ITN-2014 WDAqua (64279).

RELATED WORK

8.

The multilingual Wikipedia has been a research target for
different disciplines. One area of interest in this context is
the study of differences in the language points of view in Wikipedia [3]. In [4], Rogers conducts an intensive case study
where he compares the highly controversial articles on the
Srebrenica massacre in several Wikipedia language editions.
In his work, all of the investigations like image alignment
and a comparison of the table of contents are made manually. To simplify such tasks in future, some of the features
mentioned in [4] have been implemented in MultiWiki.

REFERENCES

[1] P. Bao, B. Hecht, S. Carton, et al. Omnipedia: Bridging the
Wikipedia Language Gap. In Proceedings of CHI ’12.
[2] E. Borra, D. Laniado, E. Weltevrede, et al. A Platform for
Visually Exploring the Development of Wikipedia Articles.
Proc. ICWSM, 2015.
[3] P. Massa and F. Scrinzi. Manypedia: Comparing Language
Points of View of Wikipedia Communities. In Proceedings of
the WikiSym ’12.
[4] R. Rogers. Digital Methods, chapter Wikipedia as Cultural
Reference. The MIT Press, 2013.

1092

