Cobwebs from the Past and Present: Extracting Large
Social Networks using Internet Archive Data
Miroslav Shaltev1 , Jan-Hendrik Zab1 and
Philipp Kemkes1 , Stefan Siersdorfer, Sergej Zerr2
1

2

L3S Research Center, Hannover, Germany

{shaltev,zab,kemkes}@L3S.de
siersdorfer@outlook.de

Electronics and Computer Science, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK

s.zerr@soton.ac.uk

ABSTRACT

Internet Archive

Social graph construction from various sources has been of
interest to researchers due to its application potential and
the broad range of technical challenges involved. The World
Wide Web provides a huge amount of continuously updated
data and information on a wide range of topics created by
a variety of content providers, and makes the study of extracted people networks and their temporal evolution valuable for social as well as computer scientists. In this paper
we present SocGraph - an extraction and exploration system
for social relations from the content of around 2 billion web
pages collected by the Internet Archive over the 17 years
time period between 1996 and 2013. We describe methods
for constructing large social graphs from extracted relations
and introduce an interface to study their temporal evolution.

1.

Data Extraction
Static graph visualization.

DB

Graph statistics.

Server

Client

INTRODUCTION

The advances of the computer science and technology in
the last decades enabled the extraction and analysis of social
networks from various types of structured and unstructured
data sources. Some sources provide explicit and easy to
extract information about user relations. This includes online platforms such as Facebook, Twitter, or LinkedIn that
maintain user databases and offer software interfaces for accessing contacts, friends, or followers. However, in many
cases information about social connections is hidden within
unstructured data such as Web pages and archives. In the
past, personal relationships have been extracted from textual and multimedia sources such as books, historical repositories [3, 1, 9] and web search engines [5, 2, 6]. Despite the
work towards increasing the efficiency of finding entity relations on the web [7] only recently in [8] a method suitable
for mining of large graphs has been proposed.

Dynamic graph visualization.

Figure 1: The overview over SocGraph system architecture and
its main storage and visualization components.

In this work we introduce SocGraph1 - a tool for the construction and analysis of social graphs extracted from the
Internet Archive (IA) data and the exploration of the temporal evolution of communities in a variety of applications.
The objectives of the analysis include, but are not limited
to shedding light on financial and business relations on the
internet, identifying ad-hoc communities centered in social
media on different events, such as solar eclipse and ”Earth
Hour” that are concerned with artificial light pollution of the
night skies of our cities,2 or describing and profiling of working groups in citizen science projects, where volunteers are
supporting scientists by classifying astronomic and biological phenomena in raw data photographs. Inspired by [8] we
move a step further in that direction and provide an interface
for studying the temporal evolution of the social networks extracted directly from archived web page content. For social

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.

SIGIR ’16, July 17-21, 2016, Pisa, Italy

1

c 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07. . . $15.00

2

DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2911467

1093

http://socgraph.l3s.uni-hannover.de
http://www.stars4all.eu/

and computer scientists our tool will provide a gateway to
the information and knowledge about connections between
people stored in the world wide web in the last few decades.

2.5 ×10

7

9 ×10

6

8
2.0

7
6

1.5

SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE

4
3

The architecture of our system is schematically shown in
Fig. 1. First, we analyze the web archive to detect comentions of entities in the web pages. In the next step, at
the server, we extract the temporal statistics and construct
the social graph by connecting extracted entity pairs using
detected edges.
Finally, the user can access the application and create, visualize, modify and interact with the graphs by issuing new
queries via a web browser based user interface. In the following we provide an overview of the system components and
show how results are presented to the user in more detail.

2.1

1
0

0.0

0.
0
0. 4
0
0. 5
0
0. 5
0
0. 5
0
0. 5
0
0. 6
0
0. 6
0
0. 6
0
0. 7
0
0. 7
0
0. 8
0
0. 8
0
0. 9
1
0. 0
1
0. 1
1
0. 2
1
0. 4
1
0. 7
2
0. 0
2
0. 5
3
0. 3
50
Weights

Year

(a)

(b)

Figure 2: The extracted data: (a) distribution of the weight per
entry in the data set, (b) number of extracted edges per year.

Data

Figure 3: A static graph showing the extracted social network
of Barack Obama and John McCain for the period May, 2008 to
May, 2009.

Extraction of Entity Pairs

The entity pairs are extracted from the body of the archived
documents first by splitting the documents into sentences using the Stanford CoreNLP library [4]. Then extracted sentences are scanned, detecting the constructs matching the
template
< person1 >< pattern >< person2 >

i

and the edge weight WE,kl between two nodes k and l as
X
WE,kl =
wk,i + wl,i ,
(3)
where wk,i and wl,i are the individual node weights. We
refer to such graphs as static graphs. To study the temporal
evolution of the social networks we also construct dynamic
graphs, consisting of sequences of static graphs for disjoint
intervals of length ∆T within the time period T .

2.4

Graphical user interface

The graphical user interface of SocGraph is accessible
through a web browser, see Fig. 5. The “Person” input field
is expecting a query such as a name of a person or a list
of person names. The “Time span” selectors can be used to
choose a time period of interest. Three filters are exposed
to the user. It is possible (a) to limit the maximum number
of considered database entries through providing the value
in the ”Maximal number of entries“ input field, filter the
nodes (b) by their weight through the adjustment of the
”Weight per entry“ slider and filter the edges (c) by their
weight through the ”Edge weight“ slider.
The node weights are normalized in the range from zero to

Graph construction

For building the social graph, we select extracted pairs
matching the user query and user defined parameters such
as the time period T , and merge them into a network considering the node weight and the edge weight between two
nodes as follows:
w = 1/n ,

We then define node weight WN over all considered entries
i as
X
WN =
wi
(2)

i

such as <Barack Obama><and his rival><John McCain>,
using a person names dictionary and a sliding window with
a pattern length of three words. To reduce noise in the data
we exclude pairs with identical names and discard overly
long sentences and patterns. We computed the weight of the
node as 1/n, where n is the number of persons co-occurring
in the sentence. In Fig.2a we plot the distribution of the
weight per entry in the data set. The distribution of the
number of extracted pairs per year is shown in Fig.2b.

2.3

2

0.5

The Internet Archive (IA) is a non-profit organization
crawling the World Wide Web since 1996. For our application we have access to web pages from about 1.8 × 109
distinct URLs, collected by the IA in the time period of 17
years between 1996 and 2013. Extracting data even from a
small sample of all archived web pages is a computationally
intensive and requires parallelization of processes.
We used Hadoop and Spark [10] technology on a dedicated
25 node computing cluster with 1.3TB main memory and
268 CPU cores to extract co-mentions of persons directly
from the archived documents. We stored extracted names,
patterns, URLs, date of the crawl and additional miscellaneous information in a relational database, which can be
accessed from the server process in real time. The crawled
documents of MIME type text have been encapsulated in
346,000 Web ARChive (WARC) files.

2.2

5

1.0

19
96
19
97
19
98
19
99
20
00
20
01
20
02
20
03
20
04
20
05
20
06
20
07
20
08
20
09
20
10
20
11
20
12
20
13

2.

(1)

where n is the number of co-mentioned persons in a sentence.

1094

(a) May 2008

(b) June 2008

(c) July 2008

(d) August 2008

(e) September 2008

(f) October 2008

(g) November 2008

(h) December 2008

(i) January 2009

Figure 4: Temporal evolution of the social graph of Barack Obama and John McCain during the US election campaign 2008

one and a color scheme ranging from blue to red is utilized
to indicate particular weight value from small to large, respectively. Overall, there are three modes of the SocGraph
operation, namely:

(iii) Finally, SocGraph provides a functionality to construct
and visualize the individual graphs for particular time
periods as well as to create an animation of graph
evolution over time. The length of particular periods (measured in days) can be entered in the “Sliding
window” input of the “Animation” field of the control
panel. The user obtains the dynamic graph by clicking
on the “Refresh” button (left to the “Play” button) of
the player control strip.
Once the data is loaded a time line with the number
of edges in each sliding window period appears in the
“Graph View” tab. To start the animation, the user
should click the “Play” button. The animation speed
can be controlled by the adjustment of the value (in
seconds) in the “Speed” input. The playback can be
paused with the “Pause button. Note, that the player
also allows step by step forward and backward rendering of the graphs, triggered by the corresponding
player control buttons.

(i) A static graph can be computed and visualized over
the complete dataset, providing an overview of all comentions for the requested persons available in the Internet Archive. This mode is triggered by the “Graph
View” button in the “Update” field of the control panel
on the right.
(ii) For a specified sliding window a temporal statistical
plot can be generated, showing the number of raw comentions as well as the weight of the persons of interest. This mode is triggered by the “Temporal statistic”
button in the “Update” field of the control panel, the
results are displayed in the “Temporal Statistic” tab of
the demonstration interface.

1095

page: http://socgraph.l3s.uni-hannover.de and can be
used with any web browser. Additionally, the web page contains a summary of the demo applications as well as a short
video tutorial.

5.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work is partly funded by the European Research
Council under ALEXANDRIA (ERC 339233), by the European Commission under grant agreements 619525 (QualiMaster) and 688135 (STARS4ALL).

6.

Figure 5: The graphical user interface of SocGraph as shown in
a web browser.

3.

[1] C. Bird, A. Gourley, P. Devanbu, M. Gertz, and
A. Swaminathan. Mining email social networks. In
MSR Workshop 2006.
[2] X. Canaleta, P. Ros, A. Vallejo, D. Vernet, and
A. Zaballos. A system to extract social networks based
on the processing of information obtained from
internet. In ICC Association for Artificial Intelligence
2008.
[3] D. K. Elson, N. Dames, and K. R. McKeown.
Extracting social networks from literary fiction. In
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL)
System Demonstrations, 2010.
[4] C. D. Manning, M. Surdeanu, J. Bauer, J. Finkel,
S. J. Bethard, and D. McClosky. The Stanford
CoreNLP natural language processing toolkit. In
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL)
System Demonstrations, pages 55–60, 2014.
[5] Y. Matsuo, J. Mori, M. Hamasaki, K. Ishida,
T. Nishimura, H. Takeda, K. Hasida, and M. Ishizuka.
Polyphonet: An advanced social network extraction
system from the web. In Proceedings of World Wide
Web Conference 2006, Semantic Web Track.
[6] M. K. M. Nasution and S. A. Noah. Superficial
method for extracting social network for academics
using web snippets. In RSKT ’10.
[7] R. Nuray-Turan, Z. Chen, D. V. Kalashnikov, and
S. Mehrotra. Exploiting web querying for web people
search in weps2. In Web People Search Evaluation
Workshop (WePS 2009).
[8] S. Siersdorfer, P. Kemkes, H. Ackermann, and S. Zerr.
Who with whom and how?: Extracting large social
networks using search engines. In CIKM ’15, pages
1491–1500. ACM.
[9] L. Wieneke, M. Düring, G. Sillaume, C. Lallemand,
V. Croce, M. Lazzaro, F. S. Nucci, C. Pasini,
P. Fraternali, M. Tagliasacchi, M. Melenhorst,
J. Novak, I. Micheel, E. Harloff, and J. G. Moron.
Building the social graph of the history of european
integration - A pipeline for humanist-machine
interaction in the digital humanities. In SocInfo 2013
International Workshops.
[10] M. Zaharia, M. Chowdhury, M. J. Franklin,
S. Shenker, and I. Stoica. Spark: Cluster computing
with working sets. In Proceedings of the 2Nd USENIX
Conference on Hot Topics in Cloud Computing,
HotCloud’10, pages 10–10, Berkeley, CA, USA, 2010.
USENIX Association.

DEMONSTRATION OVERVIEW

In the demonstration we will primarily show how the SocGraph time travel graph system works and how the social
networks are constructed from the content of IA web pages.
We will demonstrate the graphical interface usage for static
and dynamic graph visualization. Additionally, we can elaborate in more detail on the person pair extraction process
and explain the underlying parallelization algorithms.
We will explore the social networks of Barack Obama
(node NBO ) and John McCain (node NM C ) for the one year
period from May, 2008 to May, 2009, roughly corresponding
to the US presidential election,as an example. The weight
per entry has been set to 0.2, which means that we allow
data records with up to four additional persons. The edge
weight filter has been set to 0.025, in order to not overload
the graphs and focus on the interesting entities. The static
graph is plotted in Fig.3. A dynamic graph has been constructed with a sliding window of 30 days. The series of
graphs are shown in Fig.4. For instance we observe that
Hillary Clinton (NHC ) node was connected to (NBO ) from
the beginning and disappeared in June 2008, corresponding
to the time point, where Hillary Clinton endorsed Barack
Obama and withdrew her candidacy. In following the sizes
of both nodes, NBO and NM C , remain similar until November, where the actual election took place and NM C drastically reduced the weight already in following month after
Barack Obama became a president of the United States.
Shortly before in September, Sarah Palins’ (NSP ) talk on
the side of John McCain had positive impact on the votes
for this candidate. This fact is also reflected in our graph
where NSP appeared in September connected to NM C .

4.

REFERENCES

DISCUSSION

In this paper we introduced a demonstration of SocGraph
- a social graph extracting system for large networks from Internet Archive data. In contrast to other research concerned
with graph construction from web related data, we are focused on the temporal evolution of social networks implicitly
contained in the stored web pages. In our future work we
plan to include pattern filtering techniques, integrate data
from search engines and evaluate event identification, as well
as sentiment analysis of the personal relationships and their
evolution. Our system will be offered as a service within
the EU Project Alexandria as part of a Web Observatory
accessible to social and computer scientists as well as to
general public for social network visualization and evolution analysis. The demonstration is available on our web

1096

