EAIMS: Emergency Analysis Identification and
Management System
Richard McCreadie, Craig Macdonald and Iadh Ounis
{firstname.lastname}@glasgow.ac.uk
University of Glasgow, UK

ABSTRACT
Social media has great potential as a means to enable civil
protection and law enforcement agencies to more effectively
tackle disasters and emergencies. However, there is currently a lack of tools that enable civil protection agencies
to easily make use of social media. The Emergency Analysis
Identification and Management System (EAIMS) is a prototype service that provides real-time detection of emergency
events, related information finding and credibility analysis
tools for use over social media during emergencies. This
system exploits machine learning over data gathered from
past emergencies and disasters to build effective models for
identifying new events as they occur, tracking developments
within those events and analyzing those developments for
the purposes of enhancing the decision making processes of
emergency response agencies.

1.

Figure 1: EAIMS architecture overview
involved in an event, enabling both the general public and
emergency response agencies to monitor what is happening
in real-time.
In recent years, there have been notable technological advances in fields such as machine learning for sentiment and
behavioral analysis [11], real-time event detection in social
streams [10], temporal event summarization [8] and credibility estimation of social content [4]. These new technologies
have the potential to provide richer information about crisis events based on social media content. However, to-date,
there are few crisis tracking and analysis tools that make
use of them.
We present a new crisis tracking and analysis toolkit,
named: EAIMS (Emergency Analysis Identification and Management System). The goal of EAIMS is to provide an integrated toolkit for automatically identifying, tracking, summarizing and managing information about emergency events
derived from social media. Unlike most crisis tracking and
analysis systems, EAIMS provides automatic real-time detection of new emergency events. Furthermore, once an
event is detected, EAIMS provides a rich suite of automatic
tracking and analysis tools, namely: automatic timeline construction, targeted sentiment analysis, user-community identification and information credibility estimation.
EAIMS is designed for use by emergency management
staff stationed at their operations center. In particular, we
envisage the system being used by two different groups of
people, representing strategic use across different events and
tactical use within a single event. First, at a strategic level,
the system can be used by emergency monitoring staff responsible for identifying new crisis events and initiating first
response procedures. In particular, automatic event detection within EAIMS can automatically alert users to potential crisis events that they can then verify through existing

INTRODUCTION

Social networks and social media have become some of the
most prominent technologies currently in use today. Indeed,
the number of different social media platforms continues to
grow, accompanied by a steady increase in the number of
users that either actively post or otherwise consume content shared using these platforms [5]. Furthermore, as these
platforms continue to proliferate, the reach of these social
networks and social media increases, particularly in rural
areas where initial adoption was low.
Importantly, social media provide a wealth of real-time
information, which, if used effectively can provide insights
about what is happening in the world. In particular, during
emergency situations such as natural disasters, information
shared on social media has been shown to be valuable [19].
Indeed, experts in a variety of domains have developed tools
to use social media to identify and track events [1, 12, 14, 16].
For instance, the Crisis Tracker system [16], uses a manually
created set of search terms to crawl crisis-related content,
which is then clustered automatically and manually annotated by volunteers. Such crisis tracking and analysis tools
can collect, analyze and aggregate information from people
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.

SIGIR ’16, July 17 - 21, 2016, Pisa, Italy
c 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ISBN 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2911460

1101

channels. Using automatic tools to aid in crisis event identification has the potential to enable faster response times to
unexpected crisis events. Second, at a tactical level, we envisage EAIMS being used by emergency analysts both during and after an event. Users can leverage the automatic
tracking and analysis tools provided by EAIMS to more effectively monitor the event itself - using social media users as
sensors. Furthermore, these tools can also be used to assess
how the agency’s response to the emergency is perceived facilitating more informed communication with the public.

2.

EAIMS ARCHITECTURE

A broad overview of the EAIMS architecture is illustrated
in Figure 1. As we can see from Figure 1, EAIMS is comprised of three main architecture layers. The lowest layer
is the crawling layer, which is responsible for collecting general, as well as event-specific social media content, which will
be processed by the upper layers. The second architecture
layer is the service layer. This layer is comprised of a series of plug-and-play services that provide the end-user with
crisis tracking and analysis capabilities. In line with the
vision of EAIMS, these services are divided into strategic
and tactical services. Strategic services provide functionality to users working at the strategic level, i.e. when tracking
different event reports across multiple regions. Meanwhile,
tactical services provide functionality when working at the
level of a single event. The tactical services also include the
Event Crawler Plug-in, which is responsible for performing
targeted collection of content for a particular event. The
third layer of EAIMS is the UI (user interface) layer. This
layer is responsible for managing and visualizing the strategic and tactical information provided by the service layer to
the user. In particular, this layer contains three main components. First, the event manager component is responsible
for maintaining the list of candidate events that have been
identified. Second, the UI layer contains the strategic UI,
that visualizes the different candidate events that have been
detected on a map for the user. Finally, the tactical UI is
responsible for visualizing the outputs from each of the tactical services for a selected event. We discuss the motivations
and implementation of the tactical and strategic services/UI
below.

3.

Figure 2: EAIMS: Strategic UI.

3.1 Event Detection
The aim of automatic event detection is to identify the
first instance of a article/post that discusses a new emerging
topic, e.g. a news article representing a new event. This
is normally achieved by incremental clustering algorithms.
However, such clustering approaches have been shown to be
too computationally intensive to be applied to high volume
streams, such as tweets. Hence subsequent approaches have
focused on constant-time approximations to perform text
clustering [13].
To enable EAIMS to identify events over high volume
tweet streams, we use a recent distributed streaming event
detection approach based on locality sensitive hashing [10].
Under this approach, when each post arrives, multiple locality sensitive hashing functions are used to generate hashes
for that post. A locality sensitive hashing function is one
where textually similar posts will receive similar hash codes
with a high probability. Hash collisions with previous posts
observed are used to determine whether a similar topic has
been observed before. Clusters of similar posts are maintained, which represent different candidate events. Once a
candidate event cluster reaches a predefined size (5 posts
in our case), that cluster is emitted as a new event. This
approach is both constant time and can be distributed over
multiple machines to achieve parallelism for large events.
The above approach generates a relatively high volume of
candidate events (hundreds per hour) over time, and are not
specific to the interests of the user. Hence, for each cluster
emitted as a candidate event, we apply an additional filtering step. In particular, we apply an SVM text classifier to
filter out those events that are not about topics of interest to
the user. We currently support two main use-cases, namely:
flash flooding and large public demonstrations, with an associated event classifier for each.

STRATEGIC SERVICES AND UI

The aim of the strategic services is to provide automatic
detection and annotation of new candidate events to the
user. To provide this functionality, there are two notable
components that are needed: 1) automatic identification of
events of interest to the user; and 2) association of those
events with locations. The output of these components are
visualized within EAIMS’s strategic UI, as illustrated in Figure 2, where each event is represented by a pin on the map.
Clicking on a pin displays the earliest tweet identified for the
event on the right hand side of the UI. Additionally, a map
overlay is displayed which provides event controls. In particular, it enables the user to initialize tracking for the event1
and to switch to the tactical view for this event. We discuss
how we tackle the event detection and location identification
components below.

3.2 Location Detection
Once a relevant event has been identified it is vital to
identify a location for that event. Indeed, most response
agencies are responsible only for particular geographical regions, hence it is important to only highlight events relevant
to the user. A candidate event is represented by a cluster
of social media posts, such as tweets. However, only about
2-3% of all tweets are geo-located [3]. Hence, there is a good
chance that none of the posts within a cluster will have geolocations.
To tackle this issue, we use the Carmen location attribution approach [6]. Carmen aims to assign a location to a
tweet from a database of known locations. To do so, it combines three types of information sourced from each tweet,

1
This triggers targeted crawling of social media posts based
on tracking terms (named entities and #hashtags) extracted
from each event cluster.

1102

Figure 3: EAIMS: Tactical UI - Search Tab.
namely: place information encoded within the tweet; geocoordinate information for the small number of tweets that
have them; and location(s) extracted from parsing the user
profile for the tweet author. An evaluation of Carmen’s performance over a tweet dataset indicates that 22% of posts
can be geo-located [6], although the granularity of the identification varies (e.g. in many cases location can only be
narrowed down to the country of interest). This is often
sufficient to identify the location for one or more posts in
our event clusters.

limit the number of indices that have to be searched based
on the user’s search constraints. Second, for cases where the
user wants results ranked by time, we initially need to only
search the most recent indices to supply the most recent results. Indices containing older content can then be searched
on-demand as the user scrolls down the search result page.

4.

4.2 Credibility Estimation

Figure 4: EAIMS: Tactical UI - Sentiment Tab.

TACTICAL SERVICES AND UI

When working with social media derived information, it
is important to be able to judge the veracity/credibility of
that information, if that information is to be actionable. To
support this, EAIMS includes a credibility estimation service that works in parallel with the integrated search service. In particular, for each social media post ranked within
a search engine result page, a credibility score is provided.
To score the credibility of a post, we use the approach proposed by Castillo et al. [4], which uses a machine-learned
regression model to score each post. This approach uses
three main types of features to distinguish the credibility
of posts, namely: text features (length of text, number of
URLs/mentions/hashtags contained); information about the
users who authored them (registration age, number of followers); and the general topics they refer to (such as the
fraction of tweets in a topic containing URLs).

In contrast to the strategic services, which identify and
visualize multiple events, the aim of the tactical services are
to provide a series of tools to enable a deeper analysis of
a single event. When a user initiates tracking of an event
within the strategic UI, the cluster of social media posts for
that event are sent to the Event Crawler Plug-in. This plugin then formulates a new tracking query to collect content
specifically for that event. To do so, it extracts all named
entities and hashtags from the event cluster. These query
terms are passed to the crawler layer as a query.
The tactical UI is illustrated in Figure 3. As we can see
from Figure 3, event-related information is displayed along
the top of the page (this can be customized by the user).
Below the event information is a series of tabs that provide access to the search, sentiment analysis and community identification functionalities (the search tab is selected
in Figure 3). Down the right hand side, the output of the
timeline generation service is displayed, showing the most
recent updates automatically extracted from the social media content stream. We discuss each of these components in
more detail below.

4.3 Sentiment Analysis
One of the areas where emergency management agencies
see value in social media is as a means to track public opinions regarding the emergency response, i.e. as a means to
judge how well the public think they are doing [9]. Prior
work on sentiment analysis in social media during crises has
applied well-known techniques for overall sentiment detection in posts [11]. However, we argue that sentiment analysis
of the overall post might not always be suitable, as it may
miss the presence of more targeted sentiments, e.g. about
the people and organizations involved (which we refer to as
sentiment targets). Hence, within EAIMS, we use a machine
learned sentiment polarity text classification model designed
to identify sentiment towards one or more named entities. In
particular, we use crowdsourced sentiment labels for entitytweet pairs to train a the classification model, using unigram
and bigrams as features. The output of the sentiment analysis component is shown in Figure 4. In particular, the currently defined entities being tracked are displayed along the
top of the UI, enabling the user to select which to view sen-

4.1 Integrated Search
The first of the tactical services is integrated search. This
service provides dynamic indexing and retrieval of social media content crawled for the event. This service enables information exploration and discovery by emergency analysis
staff during, as well as after the event. To provide social
search capabilities, we build on top of the real-time indexing and retrieval functionality of the Terrier search engine
platform [7]. In particular, using Terrier v4.1, we deploy
a real-time distributed index using a temporal documentpartitioning scheme. Under this setup, multiple mini-indices
are constructed, each containing documents from a particular time period. For an emergency management scenario,
this partitioning scheme has two major advantages. First,
since many search requests will be time-orientated, we can

1103

analysis tools for use over social media during emergencies.
It combines state-of-the-art event detection, sentiment analysis, timeline generation, credibility analysis and community
identification technologies to enable emergency monitoring
staff to better leverage social media during crises. This prototype system is currently being deployed for flooding and
public security use-cases within the FP7 SUPER Project.

6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work has been carried out in the scope of the EC
co-funded SUPER Project (FP7-606853).

7. REFERENCES
[1] F. Abel, C. Hauff, G-J. Houben, R. Stronkman and K.
Tao. Twitcident: Fighting Fire with Information from
Social Web Streams. In Proc. of WWW, 2012.
[2] F. Aisopos, G. Papadakis, and T. Varvarigou. Sentiment
analysis of social media content using n-gram graphs. In
Proc. of WSM, 2011.
[3] S. H. Burton, K. W. Tanner, C. G. Giraud-Carrier and J.
H. West. “Right time, right place” health communication
on Twitter: Value and accuracy of location information.
Journal of Medical Internet Research, 14(6), 2012.
[4] C. Castillo, M. Mendoza and B. Poblete. Information
credibility on Twitter In Proc. of WWW, 2011.
[5] A. Datta, M. Dikaiakos, S. Haridi, and L. Iftode.
Infrastructures for online social networking services [guest
editorial]. IEEE Internet Computing, 16(3):10–12, 2012.
[6] M. Dredze, M. J. Paul, S. Bergsma and H. Tran. Carmen:
A Twitter Geolocation System with Applications to Public
Health. In Proc. of HIAI, 2013.
[7] C. Macdonald, R. McCreadie, R. L. Santos, and I. Ounis.
From puppy to maturity: Experiences in developing terrier.
Proc. of OSIR, 2012.
[8] R. McCreadie, C. Macdonald, and I. Ounis. Incremental
update summarization: Adaptive sentence selection based
on prevalence and novelty. In Proc. of CIKM, 2014.
[9] R. McCreadie et al. SUPER: Towards the use of Social
Sensors for Security Assessments and Proactive
Management of Emergencies. In Proc. of SWDM, 2015.
[10] R. McCreadie, C. Macdonald, I. Ounis, M. Osborne, and
S. Petrovic. Scalable distributed event detection for
Twitter. In Proc. of IEEE Big Data, 2013.
[11] S. Narr, M. Hülfenhaus, and S. Albayrak.
Language-independent Twitter sentiment analysis. In Proc.
of KDML, 2012.
[12] M. Osborne et al. Real-Time Detection, Tracking, and
Monitoring of Automatically Discovered Events in Social
Media. In Proc. of ACL, 2014.
[13] S. Petrovic, M. Osborne and V. Lavrenko. Streaming first
story detection with application to Twitter. In Proc. of
NAACL, 2010.
[14] H. Purohit and A. P. Sheth. Twitris v3: From Citizen
Sensing to Analysis, Coordination and Action. In Proc. of
ICWSM, 2013.
[15] J-C. Puras and C. A. Iglesias. Disasters2.0. Application of
Web 2.0 technologies in emergency situations. In Proc. of
ISCRAM, 2009.
[16] J. Rogstadius, M. Vukovic, C. A. Teixeira, V. Kostakos, E.
Karapanos, J. A. Laredo. CrisisTracker: Crowdsourced
social media curation for disaster awareness. IBM Journal
of Research and Development, 57(5), 2013.
[17] R. L. T. Santos, C. Macdonald, and I. Ounis. Search
Result Diversification. Foundations and Trends in
Information Retrieval, 2015.
[18] H. Sayyadi, M. Hurst and A. Maykov. Event Detection and
Tracking in Social Streams. In Proc. of ICWSM, 2009.
[19] J. Sutton, L. Palen, and I. Shklovski. Backchannels on the
front lines: Emergent uses of social media in the 2007
southern California wildfires. In Proc. of ISCRAM, 2008.

Figure 5: EAIMS : Tactical UI - Community Tab
timent for. Sentiment is then visualized in two ways. First,
as a color-coded graph showing the sentiment polarity distribution for the currently selected entity over time. Second,
a listing of recent posts expressing sentiment about that entity. The user can add new entities to track at any time.

4.4 Community Identification
Emergency management agencies typically maintain a social media presence as a communication channel with the
general public. To make effective use of this channel, it is
important to identify groups of stakeholders within the social network that can be messaged, such as local response
volunteers or news agencies covering the event. To support this use-case, EAIMS provides an automatic community identification functionality. In particular, we use an
approach based on topic modeling to identify communities
as determined by the users’ interaction patterns within the
social network. User communities are visualized within the
community tab of the tactical UI, as shown in Figure 5. In
particular, the user can switch between any of the communities identified using the buttons displayed along the top of
the UI. For the currently selected community, the top influencers are displayed, ranked by the number of social media
connections they have within the network.

4.5 Timeline Generation
Finally, EAIMS provides a real-time timeline generation
and notification functionality. In particular, the user can
specify a series of information types to track, e.g. messages
related to deaths or injuries. The timeline generation component monitors the social media content crawled for the
event being tracked and extracts posts related to each of
the specified information types to return to the user as updates. To achieve this, we build on recent works in the field
of temporal summarization [8] to find relevant posts as they
are crawled and then then apply explicit diversification with
respect to the specified information types using the xQuAD
framework [17]. In this way, we score a post based its relevance to the event, its coverage of information about the
event, and its novelty with respect to specified information
types. Posts that exceed a score threshold are displayed
within the tactical UI as updates, as illustrated in Figure 3.

5.

CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we presented the Emergency Analysis Identification and Management System (EAIMS), a prototype
service that provides real-time detection, monitoring and

1104

