Tweetviz: Visualizing Tweets for Business Intelligence
Bas Sijtsma

Pernilla Qvarfordt

University of Amsterdam
Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Francine Chen

FX Palo Alto Laboratory, Inc.
Palo Alto, CA

btsijtsma@gmail.com

{pernilla,chen}@fxpal.com

ABSTRACT

•Human-centered computing → Visualization design
and evaluation methods; User studies;

Twitter is a social networking platform where users can
send 140 character messages (‘tweets’). Each day its users’
generates over 500 million messages 1 . The large quantity
of data necessitates automated tools to filter, order, mine
and visualize it. In addition, the unstructured and noisy
nature of social media data makes it difficult for companies
to identify actionable areas of improvement.
We present Tweetviz, an interactive social media analytics
system for exploring large collections of geo-tagged Twitter
data. Tweetviz was developed based on requirements obtained from interviews with business owners and social media marketeers. Tweetviz addresses two major problems: 1)
identifying potential issues at a company’s location; and 2)
finding information about visits to competitors among their
customers. Tweetviz is designed to provide location-specific
actionable information that can be used to improve a business.

Keywords

2.

Social Media Analytics; Information Visualization; Location
Profiling; Sentiment Analysis

A number of commercial social media tracking products
such as Hootsuite2 and Sproutsocial3 focus on offering customer interaction statistics. They track metrics related to
the number of responses to a company’s messages, attempt
to define the most successful response length, and other
types of aggregated daily activity statistics. While this information is valuable from an on-line marketing perspective,
this does not help businesses understand their customers’ expressions at the venue level. Other systems such as Brandwatch4 and Zignal Labs5 focus in real-time event identification, e.g., identifying unhappy customers. Again, information at the venue level is not supported and analysts need
to supply keywords of interest to provide to the system.
Several research systems have been developed for mining
Twitter data. Diakopoulos’ et al. developed a tool for mining current events from Twitter [2] which aimed to support
journalists who wish to extract news from aggregated social
media data. The user interface was specifically designed to
allow for journalistic investigation of real-time responses to
news events. Similarly, TwitInfo [3] allows users to explore
real-time events occurring on Twitter. Both these systems
are time-line based, and extract noteworthy elements based
on tweet volume peaks and word-frequency based heuristics

Social media offers potential opportunities for businesses to
extract business intelligence. This paper presents Tweetviz,
an interactive tool to help businesses extract actionable information from a large set of noisy Twitter messages. Tweetviz visualizes the tweet sentiment of business locations, identifies other business venues that Twitter users visit, and estimates some simple demographics of the Twitter users frequenting a business. A user study to evaluate the system’s
ability indicates that Tweetviz can provide an overview of a
business’s issues and sentiment as well as information aiding
users in creating customer profiles.

CCS Concepts

1.

INTRODUCTION

Today’s widespread use of social media offers new opportunities for businesses to extract business intelligence. Consumers freely share their opinions about products and services at a large scale on platforms such as Facebook and
Twitter. This provides a valuable resource that businesses
can leverage for a competitive advantage. Marketers can
mine the vast amount of data to detect and discover new
knowledge, such as insights into customer interests, competitors offers, or detecting problems with a service, and
use these insights to realize value and competitive intelligence. Traditionally, businesses spend a lot of effort obtaining customer opinions through focus groups, interviews, and
so on. Hence, social data monitoring tools that assess the
consumers’ opinion are of major interest to businesses that
recognize the benefits of social media.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.

1

RELATED WORK

http://www.twitter.com/about
https://hootsuite.com/
3
http://sproutsocial.com/
4
http://www.brandwatch.com
5
zignallabs.com
2

SIGIR ’16, July 17-21, 2016, Pisa, Italy
c 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2911470

1153

within a small time frame. Tweetmotif [4] is an application for extracting topics and summarizing sentiment from
Tweets. This system allows exploratory search of any query
given by the user. All three systems contain elements that
are potentially valuable for a business analyst. However,
none of these systems consider the geographical origin of
messages, thereby losing a substantial level of context that
could be used to gather business intelligence. The goal of
this research is to leverage the geographical information to
provide actionable location specific information.
Conversely, Chen et al. [1] mined social media data to
profile businesses at specific locations. They matched geotagged tweets to Foursquare venues by performing densitybased clustering to identify a tweet’s specific business location. Then, the average sentiment of tweets at each location
was computed, thereby providing a sentiment profile of the
business. Tweetviz provides and interactive visualization for
mining this processed tweet data together with information
extracted from related social media data.

JavaScript framework, supported by a back-end written in
Node.js. All data is stored in a MySQL server. The system is designed to allow browsing of the available data with
direct updates without reloading the page whenever an interaction is performed. Figure 1 displays a screen capture
of the system.

3.

To support quick access and comparison of the sentiment
at different branches, each branch is marked on the map with
a color corresponding to the location’s average sentiment
(item 8). Tweets of selected cities, neighborhoods and/or
branches, are displayed at the bottom of the user interface
(item 11).
To assist in the identification of positive and negative aspects about the business’ service repeatedly voiced on Twitter, Tweetviz displays tweets at selected venues grouped by
keywords (item 10). Keywords were automatically identified
as frequent nouns (each tweet was parsed using the Stanford
NLP parser6 ).
When a keyword and sentiment is selected, the list of
tweets (item 11) refreshes to only show tweets matching the
selection. Since the sentiment classification is not perfect, a
user can easily reclassify, with a single click, a tweet as the
opposite sentiment, or mark it as irrelevant. This functionality allows an analyst to organize and improve the quality
of their company’s data in order.

3.2.1

3.2.2

TWEETVIZ

The aim of Tweetviz is to provide business owners with
actionable information about business locations. To understand what information business owners desired, we conducted interviews with business owners involved in decisionmaking or social media management. Based on the interviews, we identified three issues these stakeholders have
when analysing Twitter feeds: 1) It’s difficult to prioritize
issues because of the large amount of data generated. Is the
opinion expressed on social media shared by a large number
of customers? 2) Identifying problems as well as positive aspects during a customer’s store experience helps businesses
identify concrete improvements to their service; 3) Knowing
who their customers are and what they like can help companies tweak their service and target the right customer.
Based on our stakeholder interviews, we identify two design requirements. First, Tweetviz should support the analyst to discover the most important topics discussed at their
business, both positive and negative. Second, the system
should help the analyst obtain a profile of their customers
and their behavior. This must be supported irregardless of
the volume of messages available.

3.1

3.2.3

Tweet Sentiment at Business Locations

Customer Demographics

An analyst can select the demographic information tab
(item 6) to view summary statistics of the neighborhoods
their customers live in to support customer profiling. This
view shows neighborhoods ordered by most unique customers
to selected venues and average home prices for the neighborhoods.

Data used in Tweetviz

To support the functionality provided by Tweetviz, several datasets were collected. To present venue-level issues,
the set of geo-tagged Twitter messages and automatically
associated Foursquare business locations (i.e., venues) from
[1] were used. The dataset contained around 24 million geotagged tweets from the San Francisco Bay Area, collected
between June 4th, 2013 to March 23rd, 2015, with 656,098
distinct Twitter users. The dataset also included the estimated sentiment of each tweet, as described in [1].
The geo-tagged Twitter messages in the dataset were also
used for estimating a customer’s home location based on
time and geo-location of the customer’s tweets. In order to
protect customers’ privacy, the granularity of the estimation was reduced to neighborhoods using Zillow and Flickr
neighborhood shapefiles rather than street address.

3.2

Venue Selection and Filtering

One of our design principles was to allow users to both
get an overview and details about business locations in the
user interface. After selecting a company from the company
dropdown (Figure 1, item 1), the user can view aggregated
tweet statistics (item 4) at the city, neighborhood or branch
levels (item 3). The user can group multiple branches together, or zoom into a single business to view its available
Twitter data. For easier access of particular cities, neighborhoods or branches, an analyst can search (item 2) locations
by name.

3.2.4

Visits to Competitor and Other Venues

A Tweetviz user can explore the other venues a business’s
customers tweet about (item 7). Although not all businesses are competitors, finding out what other businesses
customers frequent can support creation of customer profiles.
To determine what other businesses a venue’s customers
visit, all tweets for each distinct customer are retrieved.
Tweets not sent from a business location are discarded. Next,
the number of visits to other businesses are extracted and
aggregated. The system keeps track of both the unique number of customers visiting a business and the total number of
visits. The results are filtered based on the list of selected
venues (item 4).

User Interface Design

Tweetviz was developed as a web application for modern
web browsers. The front-end was built using the Angular

6

1154

http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/lex-parser.shtml

Figure 1: Screen capture of the Tweetviz user interface with elements marked with numbers in circles.

4.

USER STUDY

We performed a user study to investigate users’ experience
of Tweetviz. We were in particular interested in understanding: 1) The system’s ability to provide a valid overview of
issues and sentiment voiced by customers; 2) The user experience; and 3) The type of inferences that participants
draw given the available demographic and competitor information.
In order to assess the usefulness of automatic organization of noisy data by keyword, we compared Tweetviz as
described above (aka experimental) with a version without
automatic keyword identification (item 10 in Figure 1). In
the baseline version, a list of all tweets for selected business were shown and the user could filter the list by typing
a search query. Twelve participants used the experimental
version of Tweetviz and another twelve participants used the
baseline version. Of the 24 participants, 5 were women and
19 men and their ages ranged from 21 to 45 years. All the
participants had experience of Twitter, and 20, or 83.3%,
stated that they felt familiar or very familiar with Twitter.
Two types of tasks were designed: identification of businessrelated issues based on tweets (in total 4 tasks; 2 tasks using
positive tweets and 2 using negative tweets) and profiling

1155

a business’ customers using the available demographic and
competitor information (in total 1 task). The experiment
was designed to represent real scenarios a business analyst
may be working towards, as indicated by interview subjects.
Ground-truth for the issue identification tasks was created
by retrieving all tweets relevant to a task, and manually
grouping the tweets based on negative and positive issues
mentioned in the tweets. Keywords were ranked according
to frequency, with the most frequent given a rank of 1.
Before the participants were given the tasks, they went
through a training phase. During training, the participants
were introduced to Tweetviz’s features one at the time and
asked to complete a simple task using the feature. Instructions were shown in a separate browser window located to
the right of a browser window with Tweetviz. Next, the participants were given the five tasks one at the time starting
with the issue identification tasks. The order of the issue
identification tasks was balanced over all participants. The
participants were free to choose how they worked with the
tasks. After all tasks, the participants were asked about
their impression of Tweetviz.

valuable for discovering the most important issues from a
large collection of tweets, even with noisy classification and
noisy tweets.

Table 1: TP-rate of ground truth top 1-3 issues
Top 1
Top 2
Top 3
Baseline
0.625
0.500
0.368
Experimental
0.708
0.614
0.500

5.

5.2

Although our participants had no experience in user profiling, when examining the results of the user profiling task,
we found that some participants were able to create rich
descriptions of the customers.
For instance, three participants tried to find the average
distance customers were traveling to reach business locations using the map. They experimented with selection and
deselecting branches in various parts of the region to determine which branches had the most customers who lived
further away from. Examples of richer descriptions from
the user profiling task were: “[..] middle/high-class income,
heavy coffee-user ”(P8) and “Customers are trendy and like
to spend time in coffee shops, the park, and shops at Whole
Foods”(P11) and “They have some brand loyalty (more checkins at Philz than any other coffee companies), but they do
also check in at competitors, such as [...]”(P6).
These observations indicate that Tweetviz provides usable
functionality to extract valuable information when effort is
spent digging deeper into the data.

USER STUDY RESULTS

5.1

Issue Identification

For the first four tasks, identification of issues, we compared the performance between Tweetviz with (experimental condition) and without (baseline condition) automatically generated keyword classifications.

5.1.1

Task Completion Time

The total time spent on all four tasks for the experimental condition ranged from 556.5s to 1247.4s, with a mean
(µ) of 947.5s and standard deviation (σ) of 209.3; versus
the baseline condition with ranged from 519.7s to 1390.3s,
µ = 1017.1s and σ = 253.6. Although on average the tasks
were completed faster on the experimental interface, an independent samples t-test revealed that the difference is not
statistically significant (t(22) = 0, 734, ns).

5.1.2

Issue Identification Performance

6.

The issues identified by the the participants were compared with the ground truth and assigned equivalent rank
to matching ground truth issue. We found that the top
three issues were more frequently found by participants using the experimental version of Tweetviz. Table 1 shows
TP-rates for correctly identified issues with rank 1 (Top 1),
rank 1 and 2 (Top 2) and top 3 ranks (Top 3). The TPrate for Top3 was significant higher for participants using
the experimental version compared with the baseline version (t(90)=2.6455, p<0.01). Many participants (7 out of
12) in the baseline condition requested that the tweets be
better organized: “It would be nice if there were a feature
that grouped together tweets with similar semantics to make
it easier to identify the top concerns or praise of customers,
rather than requiring the user to examine every individual
tweet when trying to find common trends in the data.” (P3).

5.1.3

Creating User Profiles

CONCLUSION

In this paper we present Tweetviz, a social media analytics tool designed to help businesses explore large volumes of
geo-located Twitter data in order to extract actionable information. Tweetviz provides users with the ability to mine
information about sentiment, possible competitors, and simple customer demographics at business locations. In a user
study, we evaluated Tweetviz’s ability to provide a valid
overview of business related issues and sentiment expressed
by its customers. We demonstrated that by interacting with
the automatically generated keywords, a users’ ability to discover the most important business-related issues in the noisy
tweet data improves, and Tweetviz’s data visualization allow
its user to generate rich user profiles.

7.

REFERENCES

[1] F. Chen, D. Joshi, Y. Miura, and T. Ohkuma. Social
media-based profiling of business locations. In
Proceedings of the 3rd ACM Multimedia Workshop on
Geotagging and Its Applications in Multimedia, pages
1–6. ACM, 2014.
[2] N. Diakopoulos, M. Naaman, and F. Kivran-Swaine.
Diamonds in the rough: Social media visual analytics
for journalistic inquiry. In Visual Analytics Science and
Technology (VAST), 2010 IEEE Symposium on, pages
115–122. IEEE, 2010.
[3] A. Marcus, M. S. Bernstein, O. Badar, D. R. Karger,
S. Madden, and R. C. Miller. Twitinfo: aggregating
and visualizing microblogs for event exploration. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human
factors in computing systems, pages 227–236. ACM,
2011.
[4] B. O’Connor, M. Krieger, and D. Ahn. Tweetmotif:
Exploratory search and topic summarization for
twitter. In Proceedings of the International AAAI
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, 2010.

Viewing Keywords and Searching Tweets

The two different versions of Tweetviz provided different
functionality for parsing the tweets. In the baseline version
the number of searches indicates that the search functionality was not well used, with µ = 1.0 (σ = 1.22) searches
performed per participant and task. A likely explanation is
that instead of searching for possible terms, the participants
scanned through all the tweets to identify business related
issues.
In comparison, in the experimental version, tweets were
automatically grouped by keyword. This functionality was
heavily used by the participants; on average they clicked on
9.2 topics per task (σ = 5.80). We also found a strong significant correlation (r = −0.7781, p < 0.05) between the number of keyword clicks and issue identification performance.
Hence, participants who clicked on more keywords found
more of the top-ranked issues. This is confirmed by participants’ comments, such as: “[Tweetviz] was good at interacting with a bunch of tweets at once” (P6). The implication
is that showing tweets by keyword has the potential to be

1156

