A Study of Information Seeking Behavior Using Physical
and Online Explorations
Dongho Choi
Library & Information Science Department
School of Communication & Information (SC&I)
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey

dongho.j.choi@rutgers.edu
ABSTRACT

(RQ2) What aspects of offline/physical exploration can be
used to explain and predict information seeking behavior?
The dissertation work consists of three studies: field study,
game study, and lab study. The field study will capture participants’ physical exploration in everyday life and understand their information exploration both offline and online,
installing an app on their phone and a Web browser plug-in
on the computer. Along with the traces captured by GPS,
participants’ intention and context will be collected through
weekly diary during the four weeks. Regarding offline information exploration, participants are doing a treasure-hunt
task that requires moving around in a physical space, looking for clues and answers to complete the given task. Online
exploratory behavior will be examined through searching/
browsing histories during assigned search task(s).
The game study is designed to monitor and compare people’s information seeking behavior, bridging the possible gaps
in findings from everyday life and controlled environment.
Participants are playing a game that requires finding information and clues in a limited space, such as an “escape
room” game. The main reason for the study is to understand people’s cognitive process during information seeking
in physical space, so we employ mobile eye tracker to observe
their eye gaze during the game.
In the lab study, participants will be involved (1) an exploratory search [5] task, asking the participant to collect
as much information as possible to write a report, and (2)
problem-solving task that requires more than simple querying to find answers to given puzzles.
Acknowledgments: This work is supported by Google.
Thanks to the ACM SIGIR for a Student Travel Grant.

People have their behavioral patterns, through which they
determine how to seek and use information. People also
exhibit established mobility pattern in their everyday lives.
Meanwhile, the modern technologies such as smartphones,
wearable devices, and eye trackers have allowed researchers
to collect personal, contextual, and cognitive information
of users, and create behavioral models from different perspectives. Considering the analogy between information exploration and geographical exploration, I want to identify
the interconnections between these behaviors and predict
individuals’ search behavior using personal and contextual
signals. The proposal uses a mixed-method approach that
involves a four-week field study, a game study, and a lab
study, collecting data from 40 participants through mobile
device, eye tracker, online logs, and weekly diary.

Keywords
Information seeking behavior; geographical exploration; exploratory behavior

1.

RESEARCH PROPOSAL

People develop their ways of information seeking over the
life span regarding searching information in their everyday
lives [3] and this behavior has been considered as an evolutionary instinct of individual [4]. Meanwhile, people show
well-established mobility pattern in their daily life such as
returners and explorers [1]. In this sense, interconnections
between human information seeking behavior and foraging
have been questioned. For example, Information Foraging
theory [2] articulates that “information foragers use perceptual and cognitive mechanisms that carry over from the
evolution of food-foraging adaptations”.
Purpose of this work is to investigate and find hypothetical interconnections between geographical exploration and
information seeking, with the following research questions:
(RQ1) To what extent, if any, do offline/physical exploration behavior relates to information seeking behavior? ; and

2.

REFERENCES

[1] L. Pappalardo, F. Simini, S. Rinzivillo, D. Pedreschi,
F. Giannotti, and A.-L. Barabási. Returners and
explorers dichotomy in human mobility. Nature
communications, 6, 2015.
[2] P. Pirolli. Information foraging theory: Adaptive
interaction with information. 2007.
[3] R. Savolainen. Everyday life information seeking:
Approaching information seeking in the context of “way
of life”. Library & Information Science Research,
17(3):259–294, 1995.
[4] A. Spink. Information behavior: An evolutionary
instinct, volume 16. Springer Science & Business
Media, 2010.
[5] R. White and R. Roth. Exploratory Search: Beyond the
Query-Response Paradigm, volume 1. 2009.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).

SIGIR ’16 July 17-21, 2016, Pisa, Italy
c 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2911482

1163

