A Novel Approach to Define and Model Contextual
Features in Recommender Systems
Parisa Lak
Ryerson University
Data Science Lab, Department of
Mechanical and Industrial Engineering

Parisa.Lak@ryerson.ca
ABSTRACT

non-trivial. For this reason, it is important to carefully evaluate each contextual information to determine if it is relevant and ultimately if it can improve the accuracy of the
system.
The general research question to be addressed in our proposed work is How to detect, define, select, model and incorporate contextual information into RS algorithms? This
question is broken down into four specific questions: RQ1.
Which information can be considered as contextual information for a specific recommendation task? In any recommendation task there is an interaction between the user and the
system that provides recommendation. Through this interaction there are several user related foot prints that may
reveal the characteristics of the situation that user interacts
with the system. RQ2. How to define contextual information as contextual features to be used in RS algorithms?
Contextual information, in their original format, often can
not be incorporated in RS algorithms. RQ3. How to select the most relevant contextual features to be used in RS
algorithms? Not all contextual features can increase the
accuracy of prediction. It is important to select the most
relevant contextual features. We proposed a novel contextual feature selection in a recent work. RQ4. How to model
and incorporate contextual features into a traditional RS algorithm? Each RS algorithm has unique feature modeling
and incorporation requirements. Selected contextual features should then be modeled to match the requirements of
the selected RS algorithm. In our prior work [2] we evaluated baseline MF algorithm and its requirements. We propose an extension to MF algorithm that incorporates multiple ”user-based” and ”item-based” contextual features. In a
recent work, we proposed and tested a context aware MF algorithm that incorporates multiple ”user-based” contextual
features.
Acknowledgments: This research is funded in part by IBM
CAS Project no. 919, and NSERC CRD Grant no. 490782
2015.

Recommender Systems(RS) provide more accurate and more
relevant recommendations using contextual feature(s). This
accuracy improvement is at the cost of computational expenses. Therefore, finding and selecting the most relevant
contextual features is an important problem. Moreover,
modeling and incorporating the selected contextual features
in RS algorithms has an impact on both the accuracy and
computational cost. We are conducting a series of studies
to detect, define, select, model and incorporate the most
relevant contextual features for RS algorithms. The feature detection, definition and selection approach involves the
evaluation of features derived from implicit and explicit information. The selected features from this approach can be
modeled and incorporated in any selected RS algorithm. In
our recent works, we also propose a series of algorithms that
incorporates multiple contextual features in the baseline matrix factorization (MF) algorithm. We use the selected contextual features to modify user biases and item biases in the
baseline MF.

Keywords
Context Aware Recommender Systems; Matrix Factorization; Recommender Systems; Contextual Feature Selection

1.

RESEARCH PROPOSAL

Traditional RS consider only the information regarding
the items and the users in order to provide recommendation. However, in some tasks user’s opinion about an item
might vary from one situation to another [1]. For these cases,
it is important to consider contextual information as additional information to generate more relevant recommendations. Context Aware Recommender Systems (CARS) are
one of the emerging topics of study in the field of RS. The
studies in this field includes the investigations on how to
model and incorporate contextual information in a traditional RS. Detecting, defining and selecting contextual features to be modeled and incorporated in RS algorithms is

2.

REFERENCES

[1] G. Adomavicius and A. Tuzhilin. Extending recommender
systems: A multidimensional approach. In Proceedings of the
International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(IJCAI-01), Workshop on Intelligent Techniques for Web
Personalization (ITWP2001), Seattle, Washington, August,
pages 4–6. Citeseer, 2001.
[2] P. Lak, B. Caglayan, and A. B. Bener. The impact of basic
matrix factorization refinements on recommendation
accuracy. In Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE/ACM
International Symposium on Big Data Computing, pages
105–112. IEEE Computer Society, 2014.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).

SIGIR ’16 July 17-21, 2016, Pisa, Italy
c 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2911481

1161

