Modeling User Feedback in Dynamic Search and Browsing
Jiyun Luo
Department of Computer Science
Georgetown University
Washington, DC, USA

jl1749@georgetown.edu

Categories and Subject Descriptors

run the algorithm n times in order to recommend n diversified documents. For each round, I sample one subtopic to
recommend based on xQuAD.
The second research question I addressed is the decision
of when to explore and when to exploit. In [6], the authors
explore during the initial phase, and then choose one path
to exploit based on user feedback. [4] applies exploration
whenever it encounters a diversified query. I argue that
their approaches only capture some specific user behavior
models. [1] applies exploration as default behavior and interprets user click as a desire to exploit similar documents.
However this assumption is not accurate. I use -greedy as
a naive approach to balance Exploration and Exploitation.
If the user has tried exploitation multiple times, then we
should switch to exploration, and vice versa. Another possible solution could be to pick one search strategy at first,
such as “exploitation”, and if no positive feedback is received
from the user, then we switch to the other search strategy.
The final challenge in this thesis is how to properly evaluate session search algorithms. We propose a new sophisticated evaluation metric, Cube Test. This new metric is able
to emphasize subtopic coverage, novelty, and retrieval accuracy at the same time. It also emphasizes minimizing user
effort by encouraging short sessions over long sessions. I plan
to use this metric, MAP, nDCG, α-nDCG and nERR-IA to
evaluate my algorithms as well as other well-known session
based retrieval algorithms. I hope these metrics can reveal
different aspects of retrieval algorithms and eventually help
us to distinguish good session search algorithms from others.

•Information systems → Retrieval models and ranking; Users and interactive retrieval;

Keywords
Session Search; Dynamic Search; User Feedback Modeling

1.

INTRODUCTION

Nowadays, searching for complicated information is a more
and more common task. User’s information needs are usually vague or consist of multiple sub-topics, and they must
formulate many different queries to achieve their search’s
goal. A lot of work has been done to improve user satisfaction during the search process. Riccho etc. are developed to
help find similar relevant documents. They help the user focus on and exploit the current search topic. xQuAD [5] etc.
are efficient diversification algorithms that help the user explore multiple search topics. None of these approaches alone
work well in session searches because none of them treat the
search session as a whole. They can’t answer the question
of when to explore and when to exploit.
In our previous work [3], we argue that it is suitable to
model session searches as a Dual-Agent Stochastic Game,
which essentially is a Partially Observable Markov Decision
Process (POMDP) [2] with two agents. Our model treats
session search as a “trial-and-error” process and uses user
feedback as learning signals to adjust its search strategies,
such as exploration and exploitation.
The major feedback we considered in our previous works
were query reformulations and user clickthrough datas. I
first extend our work by introducing more user feedbacks
into our framework. We implement a new search engine UI
which allows users to explicitly mark out relevant passages
and irrelevant documents. With these explicit feedbacks, I
can improve the exploitation algorithm. I use the relevant
text to reform a new query for retrieval. The irrelevant documents are then used to re-rank the retrieved documents.
For exploration, my algorithm is inspired by xQuAD. The
subtopics are found by the user during a search process. I

References
[1] C. Brandt, T. Joachims, Y. Yue, and J. Bank. Dynamic
ranked retrieval. In WSDM ’11.
[2] L. P. Kaelbling, M. L. Littman, and A. R. Cassandra.
Planning and acting in partially observable stochastic
domains. Artificial intelligence, 101(1):99–134, 1998.
[3] J. Luo, S. Zhang, and H. Yang. Win-win search:
Dual-agent stochastic game in session search. In SIGIR
’14.
[4] K. Raman, P. N. Bennett, and K. Collins-Thompson.
Toward whole-session relevance: Exploring intrinsic
diversity in web search. In SIGIR ’13.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).

[5] R. L. Santos, C. Macdonald, and I. Ounis. Exploiting
query reformulations for web search result
diversification. In WWW ’10.

SIGIR ’16 July 17-21, 2016, Pisa, Italy
c 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).

[6] M. Sloan and J. Wang. Dynamic information retrieval:
Theoretical framework and application. In ICTIR ’15.

ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2911483

1177

