Measuring Interestingness of Political Documents
Hosein Azarbonyad
h.azarbonyad@uva.nl
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

ABSTRACT

debates [1] or the structural information of debates [6]. Both of
these approaches do not use the main content of the debates for assessing their interestingness. We are aiming to propose text-based
measures of interestingness for political debates and also leverage
useful structural information of debates as well as the topical diversity of them.
We break RQ1.1 down into three research questions. We first
study whether interestingness of political debates is correlated with
their topical diversity and answer the following question: RQ1.2:
Are topically diverse political documents also interesting? Usually topical diversity of documents is measured by means of topic
models. The main intuition is that if a document covers many dissimilar topics it is a diverse document. We propose a parsimonization technique [5] to extract salient information from topic models
which makes them more suitable for the task of estimating diversity of documents compared to current topic models. The next research question is: RQ1.3: What are the main deficiencies of current topic models in estimating topical diversity of documents? And
how effective is the proposed parsimonious topic model in addressing these deficiencies? We use the proposed parsimonious topic
models to measure the topical diversity of documents. Then using the estimated diversity values for the debates, we analyze the
impact of different sources of diversity on making the documents
topically diverse. Our next research question is: RQ1.4: What are
the main sources of diversity of debates? And how they affect the
topical diversity of debates? As the sources of diversity, we study
the effect of diversity of people participated in debates and the diversity of main topics of debates. We incorporate these sources of
diversity in our proposed interestingness and diversity measures.

Political texts are pervasive on the Web covering laws and policies in national and supranational jurisdictions. Access to this data
is crucial for government transparency and accountability to the
population. The main aim of our research is developing a ranking method for political documents which captures the interesting
content within political documents. Text interestingness is a measure of assessing the quality of documents from users’ perspective
which shows their willingness to read a document. Different approaches are proposed for measuring the interestingness of texts. In
this research we focus on measuring political texts’ interestingness.
As political data sources, we use publicly available parliamentary
proceedings.

Keywords
Text Interestingness; Topical Diversity; Political Documents

1.

RESEARCH PROPOSAL

Political texts such as parliamentary proceedings are valuable information sources for historians, politicians, and also the public.
Access to this data is crucial for government transparency and accountability to the population [2]. Therefore, there is a need to
develop techniques to access and analyze the content of political
data sources. In this research we focus on measuring the interestingness of political documents. Interestingness of documents could
be used for ranking these documents and help the users to not only
find the documents that are related to their information need but
also focus on more interesting documents. The availability of usergenerated text-based reviews stimulated research in automatically
computing the interestingness of texts [3, 4]. Our main research
question is: RQ1: What aspects of interesetingness are covered by
current approaches? How can we incorporate the aspects related
to documents content in text interestingness measures? Our main
goal is to design a measure for estimating the interestingness of
debates. In [3] it is shown that text interestingness is highly correlated with topical diversity on e-books and e-commerce products
description datasets. The current measures use either the topical
diversity of documents to measure the interestingness of political

Acknowledgements This research was supported by the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (ExPoSe project, NWO
CI # 314.99.108; DiLiPaD project, NWO Digging into Data
# 600.006.014) and by the European Community’s Seventh Framework Program (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement ENVRI,
number 283465.

REFERENCES
[1] H. Azarbonyad, F. Saan, M. Dehghani, M. Marx, and J. Kamps. Are
topically diverse documents also interesting? CLEF’15, 2015.
[2] M. Dehghani, H. Azarbonyad, M. Marx, and J. Kamps. Sources of
evidence for automatic indexing of political texts. ECIR’15, 2015.
[3] M. Derzinski and K. Rohanimanesh. An information theoretic
approach to quantifying text interestingness. In NIPS MLNLP, 2014.
[4] D. Ganguly, J. Leveling, and G. J. F. Jones. Automatic prediction of
aesthetics and interestingness of text passages. COLING’14, 2014.
[5] D. Hiemstra, S. Robertson, and H. Zaragoza. Parsimonious language
models for information retrieval. SIGIR’04, pages 178–185, 2004.
[6] A. Hogenboom, M. Jongmans, and F. Frasincar. Structuring political
documents for importance ranking. NLDB’12, 2012.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).

SIGIR ’16 July 17-21, 2016, Pisa, Italy
c 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 123-4567-24-567/08/06. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2911485

10.475/123_4

1175

