Modelling User Search Behaviour Based on Process
Mengdie Zhuang
Information School
University of Sheffield
Sheffield, UK

mzhuang1@sheffield.ac.uk
identify behaviour patterns across users’ search process;
investigate the validity of behavioural patterns and whether the
patterns are indicative of user perception, which further implicate
trends for either search success or failure. We will address the
following research questions: Q1. Which user behaviour measures
are indicative of user perception? Q2. What behaviour patterns
are represented in the search process when users use search
systems for work task completion? Q3. What are the behaviour
patterns of search process when users do not have a clear search
task in mind (exploratory search)? Q4. How could these
behaviour patterns be used to understand and produce a
predictive model of user perception?

ABSTRACT
Typically, interactive information retrieval (IIR) system
evaluations assess search processes and outcomes using a
combination of two types of measures: 1. user perception (e.g.
users’ attitudes of the search experience and outcome); 2. user
behaviour (e.g. time and counts of various actions including
mouse and keyboard clicks). In general, we assume that they are
indicative of the search outcomes (e.g. performance, opinion).
However, search is a dynamic process with changing outcomes.
Therefore, neither measure solely provides a holistic way of
evaluating search. On one hand, user behaviour measures are only
descriptive of the outcome, and are not interpretive of the process.
That is to say, they lack the rationale behind why those behaviours
occurred. Another problem is that some mental activities may not
reflect on user behaviour [1]. The challenge with logfiles, which
contain behaviour data, is the voluminous number of data points
and the need to find a reliable approach to define groups or sets
based on behavioural patterns. Not all users are alike and nor do
they all take the same approach to search for the same things, as
evidenced by the TREC, INEX and CLEF interactive tracks. On
the other hand, user perception measures are acquired in such
small samples that do not scale to large participant populations,
and are rarely measured constantly due to the laborious and time
consuming data collection methods (e.g. questionnaire, interview).
Moreover, not enough emphasis is put on assessing the reliability
of individual perception measures, and the wide usage of likerttype scale limits the interpretation of answers. For a holistic
understanding of the search process, we need both perception and
behaviour measures. I speculate that user behaviour may predict
user perception, and thus we should be able to analyse large-scale
files for a greater understanding of the likely human responses.

The datasets I propose to use contain both user behaviour data
from logfiles and user perception data from the results of the User
Engagement Scale [4], which were collected in previous studies,
and they covered different task types. Tackling such problems
requires a mix of user- and system-centred approaches, and
pattern recognition methodologies, such as time series analysis
and Hidden Markov Model [2], will be applied. Our preliminary
test [6] showed that although aesthetics and usability perceptions
of search appear un-influenced by users interactions with system,
attention, involvement and novelty were associated with general
actions. Ultimately, this research will augment the development of
a predictive model of search success, as well as a more costefficient interactive information retrieval evaluation method that
enables automated data collection of essential measures, that
would benefit both users and search engine developers.

Keywords
Search process; user behaviour; interactive information retrieval
evaluation

REFERENCES

This problem is a pervasive one that exists from small projects to
large organisations. In addition, the evaluation of search systems
based on the entire search process has not been investigated
adequately. Although some models (e.g. Marchionini’s model [3])
of the search process fits real-life search, it is still considered
fundamental in describing mental activities in the search process,
and the seemingly random iterations of mental status is not easily
accessible. Previous studies (e.g. [5]) have used a short piece of
action sequence to represent search trail, but it was measured in a
short time period, rather than covering the whole search process.

[1] Barreda-Ángeles, M., Arapakis, I., Bai, X., Cambazoglu,
B.B., and Pereda-Baños, A., 2015. Unconscious
Physiological Effects of Search Latency on Users and Their
Click Behaviour. Proc. SIGIR'15, 203-212.
[2] Bishop, C.M., 2006. Pattern Recognition. Machine Learning.
[3] Marchionini, G., 1995. Information seeking in electronic
environments. Cambridge University Press.
[4] O'brien, H.L. and Toms, E.G., 2008. What is user
engagement? A conceptual framework for defining user
engagement with technology. JASIST, 59, 6, 938-955.

The purpose of this research is to investigate the relationship
between user perception and user behaviour during search;

[5] White, R.W. and Dumais, S.T., 2009. Characterizing and
predicting search engine switching behavior. Proc.
CIKM’09, 87-96.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party
components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the
Owner/Author. Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
SIGIR '16, July 17–21, 2016, Pisa, Italy.
ACM 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2911486

[6] Zhuang, M., Toms, E.G., and Demartini, G., 2016. The
Relationship Between User Perception and User Behaviour
in Interactive Information Retrieval Evaluation. In Advances
in Information Retrieval, Springer, 293-305.
[7]

1179

