User Interaction in Mobile Web Search
Jaewon Kim
Research School of Computer Science
The Australian National University
Canberra, ACT 0200, Australia

jaewon.kim@anu.edu.au

ABSTRACT
From previous studies, we believe that search behaviour on
touch-enabled mobile devices is different from the behaviour
with desktop screens. In the proposed research, we intend
to explore user interaction while searching with the aim of
improving search experience on mobile devices.

CCS Concepts
•Information systems → Search interfaces; Web search
engines; •Human-centered computing → Touch screens;

Keywords
User interaction; web search; mobile device

1.

RESEARCH AND RESULTS

Several studies have compared user behaviour and search
performance between a desktop monitor and a mobile device
(e.g., [3]), and it is believed that search engine developers
need to provide a different presentation design for mobile
web search. However, one remarkable trend of mobile devices is their enlargement of screen sizes during last a few
years. Compared to early smartphones which have screens
less than 4 inches across (diagonal), recently smartphones or
phablets (a combined word of phone and tablet) have about
4.5 inches and over 5.5 inches, respectively. This led us to
look for differences in search behaviour on different small
screens, and if there are any, to suggest better presentation
of search results for each screen size. Briefly, we found that
participants in our experiment exhibited different search behaviours: less eye-movement within top links on the larger
screen, fast reading with some hesitation before choosing a
link on the medium, and frequent use of scrolling on the
small screen. With this result, we suggested several ideas
for presentation design for each screen size [4].
There are a number of studies which have investigated
user interaction with search engine result pages (SERPs),
and many of them indicated that the use of scrolling is

closely related search behaviour (e.g., [2]), although people must still scroll through SERPs to see beyond the page
folds. To the best of our knowledge, vertical scrolling is
the only way to control viewport while searching, and is
provided by all search engines. Because people are familiar with turning page horizontally when they read a book,
and when controlling applications which provide horizontal
switching interface (e.g., weather and shopping), it is worth
investigating the effect of horizontal and vertical viewport
control types (pagination versus scrolling) in mobile web
search. This work has been completed, and our findings
suggest that participants using pagination were more likely
to find relevant documents despite spending less time on the
SERPs overall.
Researchers have studied user interaction under manipulated elements of SERPs (e.g., length of snippets and rank
order [1]) to investigate the effects of the contents on desktop monitors. Compared to effects on the desktop screens,
searching with smartphones may be more affected by the elements of SERPs due to the smaller space to display search
results. In addition, Google has started providing a mobile
indicator, providing a small mark indicating that an item
on a search results page links to a mobile optimized page
instead of a full-size page for desktops as suggested by our
earlier work [3]. We are currently investigating how the elements of SERPs interact with searchers, and how much
these provide a better search experience, on small screens.

2.

REFERENCES

[1] E. Cutrell and Z. Guan. What are you looking for?: An
eye-tracking study of information usage in web search.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference, pages
407–416. ACM, 2007.
[2] L. A. Granka, T. Joachims, and G. Gay. Eye-tracking
analysis of user behavior in WWW search. In
Proceedings of the 27th annual international ACM
SIGIR conference, pages 478–479. ACM, 2004.
[3] J. Kim, P. Thomas, R. Sankaranarayana, T. Gedeon,
and H.-J. Yoon. Eye-tracking analysis of user behavior
and performance in web search on large and small
screens. Journal of the Association for Information
Science and Technology, 66(3):526–544, 2015.
[4] J. Kim, P. Thomas, R. Sankaranarayana, T. Gedeon,
and H.-J. Yoon. Understanding eye movements on
mobile devices for better presentation of search results.
Journal of the Association for Information Science and
Technology, 2016.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).

SIGIR ’16 July 17-21, 2016, Pisa, Italy
c 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2911476

1189

