Time-Quality Trade-offs in Search
Ryan Burton
University of Michigan School of Information
105 S. State St.,
Ann Arbor MI, 48109

ryb@umich.edu

ABSTRACT

by other “slow” movements such as slow food, slow travel,
and slow technology [3], the authors posited that such a system may also lead to changes in how individuals and groups
approach the process of search if a system emphasized slowness over speed. The authors proposed that users would
be encouraged to be more mindful and reflective through
revisiting previous journeys and exploring connections and
relationships between search results.
In our work, we explore the space of time-quality tradeoffs in search, and investigate the value that users perceive
in the face of such trade-offs, as well as how users’ search
behaviors change when learning the capabilities of such systems. Primarily, this involves behavioral log analysis of new
system designs as well as qualitative methods. Additionally, we are interested in the various ways in which we may
improve quality with new algorithms that are flexible to dynamic time constraints.

This research explores the notion of slow search, where retrieval speed may be traded for improvements in result quality. This time-quality tradeoff leads to a number of implications for user interface and algorithm design. We will
explore this space along various dimensions, including behavioral and qualitative analyses of interaction to investigate the value a user that is able to perceive when given the
option to use slow search in addition to traditional search.
We will also examine how different notions of ‘quality’ that
a system might optimize may fit into this framework.

CCS Concepts
•Information systems → Search interfaces; Retrieval
models and ranking; Personalization;

Keywords

2.

Search behavior; interactive information retrieval; user interfaces; slow search

1.

RESEARCH GOALS

Our research goals center around understanding 1. how
users’ mental models are constructed as they become acclimatized to new search paradigms, 2. how individuals may
use these novel systems depending on how much value they
attribute to these systems, and 3. how we may use the
lessons learned by addressing the aforementioned goals to
design new algorithms and interfaces. The findings from
this research will enable us to understand the ways in which
we may build flexible IR systems that can address the underserved needs of users, being aware of contextual constraints
such as time and urgency.

CONTEXT AND MOTIVATION

With the current popularity of Web search, users have become accustomed to information retrieval systems that are
optimized to return the results of a search query within a
fraction of a second. In order to be this fast, system implementors must make trade-offs between speed and quality.
Traditionally, many IR systems make a number of simplifying assumptions about the linguistic complexity of queries
and documents, and the time budget given to document
matching, ranking, and additional distinguishing features
such as personalization tends to be very small [4, 2]. With
these simplifications, the scope of potential improvements
may be limited for topic relevance, personalization, or ranking for diversity.
Proposed by Dörk et al. [1] and Teevan et al. [4] in 2013,
slow search refers to the notion that a system may “take its
time” to process results for additional effectiveness. Inspired

3.

REFERENCES

[1] M. Dörk, P. Bennett, and R. Davies. Taking our sweet
time to search. In Proceedings of CHI 2013 Workshop
on Changing Perspectives of Time in HCI, 2013.
[2] M. L. Mauldin. Retrieval performance in FERRET: A
conceptual information retrieval system. In Proceedings
of SIGIR 1991, pages 347–355. ACM, 1991.
[3] L. Poirier and L. Robinson. Informational balance: slow
principles in the theory and practice of information
behaviour. Journal of Documentation, 70(4):687–707,
2014.
[4] J. Teevan, K. Collins-Thompson, R. W. White, S. T.
Dumais, and Y. Kim. Slow search: Information
retrieval without time constraints. In Proceedings of
HCIR 2013, page 1. ACM, 2013.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).

SIGIR ’16 July 17-21, 2016, Pisa, Italy
c 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2911484

1185

