Collaborative Information Seeking:
Art and Science of Achieving 1+1>2 in IR
[Half-day Tutorial]
Chirag Shah
School of Communication & Information
Rutgers University
4 Huntington St, New Brunswick, NJ 08873, USA

chirags@rutgers.edu
ABSTRACT

Presenter: Chirag Shah

Traditional IR techniques, systems, and methods that assume an individual searcher are often shown to be inadequate for addressing search problems that are multi-faceted
and/or too complex or difficult for individuals. The next
big leap in information seeking/retrieval could happen by
considering social and collaborative aspects of search. In
this half-day tutorial, this concept, along with some of the
foundational works and latest developments in the field of
collaborative information seeking (CIS) will be presented.
Specifically, the course will introduce the student to theories, methodologies, and tools that focus on information
retrieval/seeking in collaboration. The student will have an
opportunity to learn about the social aspect of IR with a focus on collaborative search or CIS situations, systems, and
evaluation techniques. The three hours will be divided as:
(1) introduction to group-based IR models, approaches, and
systems; (2) back-end of CIS systems with system-focused
mediation and front-end with user-focused mediation; and
(3) evaluation of CIS systems/approaches, prediction and
recommendations with collaborative aspects of IR, and future directions. The attendees will be given a course-pack
that will include a reference list, an annotated bibliography
of seminal works in the field, and depictions of relevant models/frameworks.

Affiliation: Rutgers University, USA
Address:
4 Huntington St, New Brunswick, NJ 08901
Phone: (848) 932-0887
Fax: (732) 932-6916
http://comminfo.rutgers.edu/ chirags
chirags@rutgers.edu
Bio:
Chirag Shah is an associate professor in both the School of
Communication & Information (SC&I) and the Department
of Computer Science at Rutgers University, USA. Shah received a PhD in Information Science from the University of
North Carolina (UNC) at Chapel Hill. He holds an MTech,
Computer Science & Engineering from IIT Madras, India
and an MS, Computer Science from UMass Amherst. His
research interests include various aspects of interactive information retrieval/seeking, especially in the context of online
social networks and collaborations, resulting in two streams
of works - Collaborative Information Seeking (CIS) and Social Information Seeking (SIS). This research is supported by
grants from the US National Science Foundation (NSF), the
Institute of Museum and Library Services (IMLS), Google,
and Yahoo! At Rutgers, he directs the InfoSeeking Lab
(http://infoseeking.org/). He has published two books on
CIS - one as a solo author [9] and the other as a co-editor
[5]. He was a guest editor for the IEEE Computer Special
Issue on CIS published in March 2014.

Length: Half day (3 hours)
Target Audience: Those interested in social and collaborative aspects of IR (from both academia and industry)
Prerequisite: A general understanding of web services, IR
systems, and content analysis

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.

SIGIR ’16, July 17-21, 2016, Pisa, Italy
c 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2914801

1191

Figure 1: Depiction of CIS and related topics using the dimensions of human-system and explicit-implicit
collaboration.

1.

OVERVIEW AND RATIONALE

2.

The course will introduce the student to theories, methodologies, and tools that focus on information retrieval/seeking
in collaboration. The student will have an opportunity to
learn about the social aspect of IR with a focus on collaborative search or collaborative information seeking (CIS) situations, systems, and evaluation techniques.
Traditionally, IR is considered an individual pursuit, and
not surprisingly, the majority of tools, techniques, and models developed for addressing information need, retrieval, and
usage have focused on single users. The assumption of information seekers being independent and IR problem being
individual has been challenged often in the recent past. This
course will introduce such works to the students, with an
emphasis on understanding models and systems that support collaborative search or browsing. To put CIS in perspective, the course will show the students how various related concepts, such as collaborative information behavior
(CIB), co-browsing, co-search, collaborative filtering, can be
placed on the dimensions of human-system and explicitnessimplicitness along with CIS and CIR (Figure 1) for exploration and developmental needs, as well as evaluation purposes.
Specifically, the course will (1) outline the research and
latest developments in the field of collaborative IR, (2) list
the challenges for designing and evaluating collaborative IR
systems, and (3) show how traditional single user IR models
and systems could be mapped to those for CIS. This will
be achieved through introduction to appropriate literature,
algorithms and interfaces that facilitate CIS, and methodologies for studying and evaluating them. Thus, the course
will offer a balance between theoretical and practical elements of CIS.

COURSE OBJECTIVES

The course will have the following broad objectives:
1. Define collaborative information seeking (CIS) and differentiate it with related terms.
2. Identify situations and motivations for CIS.
3. List various dimensions of collaborative work/systems/method.
4. Discuss system-mediated and user-mediated CIS with
examples.
5. Enumerate essential and desired features of CIS systems.
6. Outline an evaluation framework for CIS.

3.

RELEVANCE TO THE IR COMMUNITY

With an increasing number of researchers from the fields
of IR, HCI, and social media coming together, there has been
an unprecedented interest to CIS/CIR and related issues in
the recent years. While the concept of people working together in solving IR problems has been explored before, it
has made its strong comeback in the past few years. This
area has gained significant momentum through a number
of workshops and other professional events, as well as special issues of journals. And yet, we have just scratched the
surface. With the advent of social media and collaboratively generated content (CGC) everywhere, it is time the
IR community takes a serious look at this topic that is increasingly achieving more relevance and importance. With
its applicability to numerous domains including education,
legal, health, and business, studying various issues relating
to CIS/CIR is very timely and relevant to the IR community.

1192

4.

OUTLINE OF THE TUTORIAL

(a) The C5 model (see Figure 2)

The three-hour course will follow a general structure given
below.

(b) Interaction, intention, trust, awareness, etc. in
defining collaboration

• Hour-1: Discuss situations for CIS; Introduce a few
group-based information seeking models and systems
(e.g., Grudin’s work [4]); Learn about the taxonomy
for CIS systems and situations (e.g., Rodden [8], Golovchinsky [2]) and see how existing systems fit into this structure.
• Hour-2: Discuss the back-end of CIS systems; Look at
the works by Pickens et al. [7], Shah et al. [11], and
Soulier et al. [12] that focus on algorithmic mediation;
Discuss the front-end of collaborative IR systems; Look
at the works by Twidale et al. [13] and Morris [6] that
focus on interface-based mediation.

(c) CIS in the context of collaboration, information
seeking, and IR
3. Background - important people, works, and recent events
relating to CIS/CIR
(a) Various research groups around the world working
on CIS/CIR
(b) Conference events, social gatherings, workshops,
etc.
4. Introducing collaboration in IR
(a) Difference between CIS and CIR

• Hour-3: Learn about existing approaches to data mining and evaluation for CIS systems (e.g., Baeza-Yates
& Pino [1]); See how system-based and user-based
measurements could be used for a more holistic analysis (e.g., Shah & Gonzalez-Ibanez [10]); Understand
how prediction and recommendation frameworks could
be incorporated in collaborative search (e.g., GonzalezIbanez et al. [3]).

(b) CIS in the context of collaborative information
behavior (CIB), co-browsing, co-search, and collaborative filtering
5. Studying group activities in time and space
(a) Placement of various collaborative activities on
time-space plane
(b) Role of such placement in studying and/or evaluating CIS systems
6. Extended framework for collaborative activities with
12 different dimensions
(a) Dimensions include intention, activeness, synchronousasynchronous, co-located or remote, system-user,
awareness, interactiveness, symmetry of roles, strength
of the tie, symmetry of benefits, and nature of information activity
7. System-mediated CIS
(a) Case study: Cerchiamo
(b) Case study: Querium
8. User-mediated CIS
(a) Case study: Ariadne
(b) Case study: SearchTogether
(c) Case study: Coagmento
9. Discuss generic features of a CIS/CIR system
(a) Essential features
(b) Desired features

Figure 2: The C5 model of collaboration.

10. Evaluation using system-focused and user-focused measures (see Figure 3)

Following is a more detailed outline of the tutorial presentation.

(a) Traditional measures: precision, recall, coverage,
novelty, diversity

1. Collaboration - what and why
(a) Requirement or setup
(b) Division of labor
(c) Diversity of skills

(b) Productivity measures: effectiveness, efficiency
(c) Usability measures: ease of learning, ease of use,
satisfaction, cognitive load
(d) Other: engagement, awareness

2. Defining collaboration - definitions from literature and
our own understanding of various terms and terminology

1193

6.

Figure 3: An example of an evaluation framework
for collaborative search.
11. Creating synergic solutions for CIS
(a) How does 1+1 become greater than 2 in collaboration
(b) Issue of control in the context of system-mediated
and user-mediated collaborations
(c) Achieving selective collaboration to provide a balance of user-control and system-intelligence for
synergy
12. Applications of CIS
(a) Exploratory search (e.g., legal informatics, patent
searching, healthcare)
(b) Education
(c) Product search (e.g., using selective collaboration
method on Amazon and eBay)
(d) Generalizing recommender systems for recommending people and processes
13. Future directions for research and development

5.

COURSE MATERIALS

Course materials will be made available on a Web site
hosted under http://collab.infoseeking.org/ two weeks prior
to the tutorial. They will include links to relevant software; links to publications that will be discussed; and mechanisms for communication (Twitter hashtags, blog space,
etc.) among the tutorial participants, before, during and
after the tutorial.
Since this course is focused on introducing several relevant
theories, models, approaches, and findings in the field of
CIS/CIR, the participants will also be given an annotated
bibliography that represents seminal works in this area.

1194

REFERENCES

[1] R. Baeza-Yates and J. A. Pino. A First Step to
Formally Evaluate Collaborative Work. In S. C. Payne
and W. Prinz, editors, Proceedings of ACM GROUP
Conference, pages 56–60, Phoenix, AZ, 1997.
[2] G. Golovchinsky, J. Pickens, and M. Back. A
taxonomy of collaboration in online information
seeking. In Proceedings of JCDL 2008 Workshop on
Collaborative Exploratory Search, Pittsburgh, PA,
June 2008.
[3] R. González-Ibáñez, C. Shah, and R. W. White.
Capturing collabportunities: A method to evaluate
collaboration opportunities in information search
using pseudo-collaboration. Journal of Association of
Information Science and Technology (JASIST), 2014.
[4] J. Grudin. Groupware and social dynamics: eight
challenges for developers. Communications of the
ACM, 37(1):92–105, Jan. 1994.
[5] P. Hansen, C. Shah, and C.-P. Klas, editors.
Collaborative Information Seeking - Best Practices,
New Domains, New Thoughts. Springer, 2015.
[6] M. R. Morris and E. Horvitz. SearchTogether: An
Interface for Collaborative Web Search. In ACM
Symposium on User Interface Software and
Technology (UIST), pages 3–12, Newport, RI, Oct.
2007. New York, N.Y.: ACM Press.
[7] J. Pickens, G. Golovchinsky, C. Shah, P. Qvarfordt,
and M. Back. Algorithmic Mediation for Collaborative
Exploratory Search. In Proceedings of the Annual
ACM Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval (SIGIR), pages 315–322,
Singapore, July 2008.
[8] T. Rodden. A Survey of CSCW Systems. Interacting
with Computers, 3(3):319–353, 1991.
[9] C. Shah. Collaborative Information Seeking: The Art
and Science of Making The Whole Greater Than The
Sum of All (The Information Retrieval Series).
Springer, Berlin, Germany, 2012.
[10] C. Shah and R. Gonzalez-Ibanez. Evaluating the
Synergic Effect of Collaboration in Information
Seeking. In Proceedings of the Annual ACM
Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval (SIGIR), pages 913–922,
Beijing, China, 2011.
[11] C. Shah, J. Pickens, and G. Golovchinsky. Role-based
results redistribution for collaborative information
retrieval. Information Processing & Management,
46(6):773–781, Nov. 2010.
[12] L. Soulier, C. Shah, and L. Tamine. User-driven
system-mediated collaborative information retrieval.
In Proceedings of the 37th international ACM SIGIR
conference on Research & development in information
retrieval - SIGIR ’14, pages 485–494, New York, New
York, USA, jul 2014. ACM Press.
[13] M. B. Twidale, D. M. Nichols, and C. D. Paice.
Supporting collaborative learning during information
searching. In Proceedings of Computer Supported
Collaborative Learning (CSCL), pages 367–374,
Bloomington, Indiana, 1995.

