Constructing and Mining Web-Scale Knowledge Graphs
Evgeniy Gabrilovich

Nicolas Usunier

Google Research

Facebook

usunier@fb.com

gabr@google.com

ABSTRACT

bases. The automatic extraction of facts from text with
thousands of possible relations and millions of entities must
be carried on with little to no explicit supervision, while
prediction or infering clusters in the knowledge graph, poses
the challenge of dealing with heterogeneous data and a large
number of relationships. In this part of the tutorial, we will
present the state-of-the-art in algorithms for link prediction
and clustering in knowledge bases and relational data, with
an emphasis on mdethods based on probabilistic models and
representation learning. We will also discuss weakly learning
algorithms for relation extraction from text.

Recent years have witnessed a proliferation of large-scale
knowledge graphs, from purely academic projects such as
YAGO to major commercial projects such as Google’s Knowledge Graph and Microsoft’s Satori. Whereas there is a
large body of research on mining homogeneous graphs, this
new generation of information networks are highly heterogeneous, with thousands of entity and relation types and billions of instances of those types (graph vertices and edges).
In this tutorial, we present the state of the art in constructing, mining, and growing knowledge graphs. The purpose of the tutorial is to equip newcomers to this exciting
field with an understanding of the basic concepts, tools and
methodologies, open research challenges, as well as pointers to available datasets and relevant literature. Knowledge
graphs have become an enabling resource for a plethora of
new knowledge-rich applications. Consequently, the tutorial
will also discuss the role of knowledge bases in empowering
a range of web applications, from web search to social networks to digital assistants. A publicly available knowledge
base (Freebase) will be used throughout the tutorial to exemplify the different techniques.

1.

2.

OBJECTIVES

We believe the tutorial will appeal to two groups of SIGIR
participants. The first group includes industry attendees
working in related areas who want to acquire more scientific
background and be apprised of the recent research results in
the field. The second group includes established researchers
as well as PhD students who are interested to work in this
exciting area and who will benefit from the introduction to
the main concepts, overview of main research challenges, and
pointers to existing resources and datasets.

3.

OVERVIEW

RELEVANCE TO THE IR COMMUNITY

Over the recent years, multiple large-scale knowledge bases
have come to existence, from purely academic projects such
as YAGO to major commercial projects such as Google’s
Knowledge Graph, and Microsoft’s Satori. These knowledge bases are an enabling resource for a plethora of new
knowledge-rich applications. The tutorial is designed to provide an overview of such applications and use-cases, as well
as equip newcomers to this area with a solid understanding
of the basic techniques, research challenges, and pointers
to relevant literature. This tutorial will discuss the role of
knowledge bases in empowering a range of web applications,
from web search to social networks to digital assistants.

This half-day tutorial will be composed of two parts. We
will first present the main concepts of knowledge bases, as
well as the main available datasets. Using the open-domain
knowledge base Freebase (now moved to Wikidata) as our
running example, we will describe the principles underlying the construction and the applications of large knowledge
bases. In particular, we will describe how to automatically
grow knowledge bases by extracting facts and events from
text, and the research challenges of entity resolution, relation extraction and link prediction. We will also discuss the
practical impact of knowledge bases on major Web applications such as search, question answering or digital assistants.
The second part will focus on the state-of-the-art and the
open research challenges in growing and mining knowledge

4.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.

FORMAT AND DETAILED SCHEDULE
1. Overview
(a) Introduction
(b) A sampler of research problems (to be covered in
detail later in the tutorial)

SIGIR ’16, July 17 - 21, 2016, Pisa, Italy

(c) Define the scope, outline the differences from prior
works on mining homogeneous graphs

c 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ISBN 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07. . . $15.00

(d) Connections to related fields (e.g., data fusion)

DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2914807

1195

2. Freebase as an example of a large-scale knowledge repository
(a) Data types, schemas, triples

BRIEF BIOGRAPHIES

6.1

Evgeniy Gabrilovich

Evgeniy Gabrilovich is a senior staff research scientist at
Google, where he works on improving healthcare. Prior to
joining Google in 2012, he was a director of research and
head of the natural language processing and information retrieval group at Yahoo! Research. Evgeniy is an ACM Distinguished Scientist, and is a recipient of the 2014 IJCAIJAIR Best Paper Prize. He is also a recipient of the 2010
Karen Sparck Jones Award for his contributions to natural language processing and information retrieval. Evgeniy
serves as a program co-chair for WWW 2017, and has served
as a program co-chair for WSDM 2015. He also served as an
area chair or senior program committee member at numerous major conferences, including SIGIR, WWW, WSDM,
KDD, AAAI, IJCAI, ACL, EMNLP, CIKM, ICDM, and
ICWSM. Evgeniy earned his PhD in computer science from
the Technion — Israel Institute of Technology.

(b) Data format and data availability
3. Constructing and growing knowledge graphs
(a) Knowledge acquisition from text
i. Entity recognition and disambiguation
ii. Mining rules and regularities from the data
(b) Link prediction (i.e., endogenous completion of
missing knowledge)
4. Applications of knowledge graphs
(a) Augmented search
i. Proactively augmenting Web search results
with structured knowledge
ii. Query expansion

6.2

(b) New knowledge-enabled applications

Nicolas Usunier

Nicolas Usunier is research scientist at Facebook AI Research. Before joining Facebook in 2015, he was associate
professor at Université de Technologie de Compiègne (UTC,
France) with a Higher-education chair from the CNRS, the
French National Research Center. Prior to his position at
UTC, he was associate professor at Université Pierre et Marie
Curie in Paris, from where he received his PhD in computer
science in 2006.
His main areas of research are large scale learning of embeddings and learning to rank, in particular with applications to knowledge bases. He served as an area chair for
NIPS 2014 and is a reviewer for the major conference in
machine learning and journals such as NIPS, ICML, JMLR
and the Machine Learning journal.

i. Open-domain question answering
ii. Towards a digital assistant: Siri, Cortana,
Google Now, etc.
5. Methods and techniques
(a) Using observable variables
i. Random walk / path-based approaches
ii. Probabilistic relational models / Markov logic
networks
(b) Using latent variables
i. Matrix/tensor factorization
ii. Block models and extensions
iii. Energy and embedding-based models

7.

6. Research challenges

REFERENCES

[1] M. Banko, M. J. Cafarella, S. Soderland,
M. Broadhead, and O. Etzioni. Open information
extraction for the web. In IJCAI, volume 7, pages
2670–2676, 2007.
[2] A. Bordes, N. Usunier, A. Garcia-Duran, J. Weston,
and O. Yakhnenko. Translating embeddings for
modeling multi-relational data. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, pages 2787–2795,
2013.
[3] A. Bordes, J. Weston, R. Collobert, and Y. Bengio.
Learning structured embeddings of knowledge bases. In
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, number
EPFL-CONF-192344, 2011.
[4] X. Dong, E. Gabrilovich, G. Heitz, W. Horn, N. Lao,
K. Murphy, T. Strohmann, S. Sun, and W. Zhang.
Knowledge vault: A web-scale approach to probabilistic
knowledge fusion. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM
SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge
discovery and data mining, pages 601–610. ACM, 2014.
[5] X. L. Dong, E. Gabrilovich, G. Heitz, W. Horn,
K. Murphy, S. Sun, and W. Zhang. From data fusion to
knowledge fusion. Proceedings of the VLDB
Endowment, 7(10):881–892, 2014.
[6] A. Fader, S. Soderland, and O. Etzioni. Identifying
relations for open information extraction. In

(a) Scaling the methods
(b) Mining new entities
(c) Knowledge representation
(d) Knowledge acquisition from multiple modalities
(e) Reasoning with commonsense knowledge
7. Resources
(a) Pointers to additional relevant datasets
(b) Pointers to relevant competitions and evaluations

5.

6.

TYPE OF SUPPORT MATERIALS TO BE
SUPPLIED TO ATTENDEES

Tutorial slides will be provided online ahead of time. The
slides from a previous edition of the tutorial at KDD’14
can be found online at http://www.cs.technion.ac.il/g̃abr/
publications/papers/KDD14-T2-Bordes-Gabrilovich.pdf

1196

Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages 1535–1545.
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2011.
[7] P. G. Ipeirotis and E. Gabrilovich. Quizz: Targeted
crowdsourcing with a billion (potential) users. In
Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on
World Wide Web, pages 143–154. ACM, 2014.
[8] C. Kemp, J. B. Tenenbaum, T. L. Griffiths,
T. Yamada, and N. Ueda. Learning systems of concepts
with an infinite relational model. In AAAI, volume 3,
page 5, 2006.
[9] N. Lao, T. Mitchell, and W. W. Cohen. Random walk
inference and learning in a large scale knowledge base.
In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 529–539.
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2011.
[10] M. Mintz, S. Bills, R. Snow, and D. Jurafsky. Distant
supervision for relation extraction without labeled data.
In Proceedings of the Joint Conference of the 47th
Annual Meeting of the ACL and the 4th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing of
the AFNLP: Volume 2, pages 1003–1011. ACL, 2009.
[11] M. Nickel, V. Tresp, and H.-P. Kriegel. A three-way
model for collective learning on multi-relational data.
In Proceedings of the 28th international conference on
machine learning (ICML-11), pages 809–816, 2011.
[12] M. Richardson and P. Domingos. Markov logic
networks. Machine learning, 62(1-2):107–136, 2006.

[13] S. Riedel, L. Yao, B. M. Marlin, and A. McCallum.
Relation extraction with matrix factorization and
universal schemas. In Joint Human Language
Technology Conference/Annual Meeting of the North
American Chapter of the ACL (HLT-NAACL ’13),
ACL, 2013.
[14] S. Riedel, L. Yao, A. McCallum, and B. M. Marlin.
Relation extraction with matrix factorization and
universal schemas. In L. Vanderwende, H. D. III, and
K. Kirchhoff, editors, HLT-NAACL, pages 74–84. ACL,
2013.
[15] M. Schmitz, R. Bart, S. Soderland, O. Etzioni, et al.
Open language learning for information extraction. In
Proceedings of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and
Computational Natural Language Learning, pages
523–534. ACL, 2012.
[16] M. Surdeanu, J. Tibshirani, R. Nallapati, and C. D.
Manning. Multi-instance multi-label learning for
relation extraction. In Proceedings of the 2012 Joint
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing and Computational Natural Language
Learning, pages 455–465. ACL, 2012.
[17] R. West, E. Gabrilovich, K. Murphy, S. Sun,
R. Gupta, and D. Lin. Knowledge base completion via
search-based question answering. In Proceedings of the
23rd international conference on World Wide Web,
pages 515–526. ACM, 2014.

1197

