Third International Workshop on Gamification for
Information Retrieval (GamifIR’16)
Michael Meder

Frank Hopfgartner

Technische Universität Berlin

University of Glasgow

Gabriella Kazai

frank.hopfgartner
@glasgow.ac.uk
Udo Kruschwitz

michael.meder@dailabor.de
Semion Ltd

University of Essex

gabs@lumi.do

udo@essex.ac.uk

ABSTRACT

dious manual labour. For example, manual feedback is required to assess the relevance of documents to a given search
task, to annotate documents or to evaluate interactive IR
approaches. A recent trend to perform these tasks is the use
of crowdsourcing techniques, i.e., obtaining relevance labels
from anonymous crowd workers via an open call. Although
research indicates that such techniques can be useful, they
fail when motivated users are required to perform a task
for reasons other than just being paid per click, document
judged or time spent on the task.
A promising approach to increase user motivation is by
employing gamification methods, which has been applied in
various environments and for different purposes such as marketing, education, pervasive health care, enterprise workplaces, e-commerce, human resource management and many
more. The definition of gamification is still under discussion,
e.g., it is still debated whether it covers methods “to facilitate and support the users’ overall value creation” [7] or if it
aims to enhance user experience using game design elements
“regardless of specific usage intentions, contexts [...]” [1] or
environments. Definitions pursuing the increase of user experience and overall value indicate that the application of
gamification is goal oriented. Although several studies indicate that gamification can lead to increased user activity, a
detailed analysis of users’ personal perception of gamification principles has barely been studied. In the last few years,
several frameworks on how to ‘gamify’ were proposed, but
there are still many open questions on how to start (e.g., [9,
2]). We argue that a particular challenge of applying gamification is to find an elegant and subtle way of adopting and
adapting game design patterns, mechanisms and elements
to a particular problem or scenario.
Given the interest in the first and second GamifIR workshops1 [4, 6] and the discussions emerging at these events, we
are convinced that we are only at the start of seeing gamification becoming an established methodology to support and
push forward IR in a variety of ways.

Stronger engagement and greater participation is often crucial to reach a goal or to solve an issue. Issues like the emerging employee engagement crisis, insufficient knowledge sharing, and chronic procrastination. In many cases we need and
search for tools to beat procrastination or to change people’s
habits. Gamification is the approach to learn from often fun,
creative and engaging games. In principle, it is about understanding games and applying game design elements in a
non-gaming environments. This offers possibilities for wide
area improvements. For example more accurate work, better
retention rates and more cost effective solutions by relating
motivations for participating as more intrinsic than conventional methods. In the context of Information Retrieval (IR)
it is not hard to imagine that many tasks could benefit from
gamification techniques. Besides several manual annotation
tasks of data sets for IR research, user participation is important in order to gather implicit or even explicit feedback
to feed the algorithms. Gamification, however, comes with
its own challenges and its adoption in IR is still in its infancy. Given the enormous response to the first and second
GamifIR workshops that were both co-located with ECIR,
and the broad range of topics discussed, we now organized
the third workshop at SIGIR 2016 to address a range of
emerging challenges and opportunities.

1.

BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION

The purpose of the GamifIR workshop series is to bring
together researchers and practitioners from a wide range of
areas including game design, IR, human-computer interaction, computer games, and natural language processing in
order to promote the development and exchange of research
ideas and results relating to emerging areas of gamification
within the context of IR.
Many research challenges in the field of IR rely on tePermission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).

2.

WORKSHOP GOALS & PROMOTION

By hosting a workshop in conjunction with SIGIR 2016,
we intented to promote this area of research by bringing together IR and games researchers and practitioners. Potential
topics for papers included:

SIGIR ’16 July 17-21, 2016, Pisa, Italy
c 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).

1
For a detailed summary of the 2015 edition of the workshop
series, we refer to [8].

ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2917759

1239

5.

• Gamification approaches in a variety of contexts, including document annotation and ground-truth generation; interface design; information seeking; user modelling; knowledge sharing

[1] S. Deterding, D. Dixon, R. Khaled, and L. Nacke. From
game design elements to gamefulness: defining
gamification. Proceeding of the 15th International
Academic MindTrek Conference, pages 9–15, 2011.
[2] J. Hamari, J. Koivisto, and H. Sarsa. Does gamification
work? - a literature review of empirical studies on
gamification. In In proceedings of the 47th Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences, 2014.
[3] F. Hopfgartner, G. Kazai, U. Kruschwitz, and
M. Meder, editors. GamifIR ’14: Proceedings of the
First International Workshop on Gamification for
Information Retrieval, New York, NY, USA, 2014.
ACM.
[4] F. Hopfgartner, G. Kazai, U. Kruschwitz, and
M. Meder. Workshop on gamification for information
retrieval (gamifir’14). In Advances in Information
Retrieval - 36th European Conference on IR Research,
ECIR 2014, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, April 13-16,
2014. Proceedings, pages 806–809, 2014.
[5] F. Hopfgartner, G. Kazai, U. Kruschwitz, and
M. Meder, editors. Proceedings of the Second
International Workshop on Gamification for
Information Retrieval co-located with the 37th European
Conference on Information Retrieval (ECIR 2015),
Vienna, Austria, March 29, 2015, volume 1345 of
CEUR Workshop Proceedings. CEUR-WS.org, 2015.
[6] F. Hopfgartner, G. Kazai, U. Kruschwitz, M. Meder,
and M. Shovman. Second international workshop on
gamification for information retrieval (gamifir’15). In
Advances in Information Retrieval - 37th European
Conference on IR Research, ECIR 2015, Vienna,
Austria, March 29 - April 2, 2015. Proceedings, pages
838–840, 2015.
[7] K. Huotari and J. Hamari. Defining gamification: a
service marketing perspective. Proceeding of the 16th
International Academic MindTrek Conference, pages
17–22, 2012.
[8] G. Kazai, Lumi, F. Hopfgartner, U. Kruschwitz, and
M. Meder. ECIR 2015 workshop on gamification for
information retrieval (gamifir’15). SIGIR Forum,
49(1):41–49, 2015.
[9] B. Morschheuser, J. Hamari, and J. Koivisto.
Gamification in crowdsourcing: A review. In proceedings
of the 49th Annual Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences (HICSS), Hawaii, USA, 2016.

• Gamification in Crowdsourcing
• Gamification for teaching IR
• Gamification in recommender systems and Apps
• User engagement and motivational factors of gamification
• Player types, contests, cooperative gamification
• Long-term user engagement
• Search challenges
• Gamification design
• Applied game principles, elements and mechanics
The workshop was advertised via various Call for Papers
that were distributed to relevant mailing lists, forums, and
social media platforms. A website2 was set up to provide
further information and the Twitter account @GamifIR was
used to promote the workshop.

3.

WORKSHOP SUMMARY

All submitted papers went through a semi-blind peerreviewing process where each submission was reviewed by
at least three experts in the field. The workshop proceedings have been published by CEUR.3
Papers were presented at the workshop on 21 July 2016 in
Pisa, Italy. Given the co-location of the workshop with the
SIGIR conference, the event mainly attracted researchers
working in the field of IR who presented their preliminary
work on applying gamification to perform various IR related
tasks such as crowdsourced document annotation, relevance
assessment or interactive search.

4.

REFERENCES

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We acknowledge the efforts of the programme committee, namely Raian Ali (Bournemouth University, UK), Omar
Alonso (Microsoft, USA), Leif Azzopardi (University of Glasgow, UK), Jon Chamberlain (University of Essex, UK), Sebastian Deterding (University of York, UK), Carsten Eickhoff (ETH Zurich, CH), Christopher Harris (State University of New York, USA), Hideo Joho (University of Tsukuba,
JP), Till Plumbaum (Technische Universität Berlin, GER),
Ashok Ranchod (University of Southampton, UK), Thomas
Springer (Technische Universität Dresden, GER), Susanne
Strahinger (Technische Universität Dresden, GER), Albert
Weichselbraun (University of Applied Sciences Chur, CH),
and Lincoln Wood (University of Auckland, NZ).
We acknowledge financial support by the European Commissiion via the European Union Seventh Framework Programme FP7/2007-2013, grant agreement number 610594
(CrowdRec).
2

http://gamifir.com/
Past editions of the workshop have been published by
ACM [3] and CEUR [5].
3

1240

