Neu-IR: The SIGIR 2016 Workshop on
Neural Information Retrieval
Nick Craswell

W. Bruce Croft

Jiafeng Guo

Microsoft
Bellevue, US

University of Massachusetts
Amherst, US

Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing, China

nickcr@microsoft.com

croft@cs.umass.edu

guojiafeng@ict.ac.cn
Maarten de Rijke

Bhaskar Mitra
Microsoft
Cambridge, UK

University of Amsterdam
Amsterdam, The Netherlands

derijke@uva.nl

bmitra@microsoft.com
Keywords

2.

Neural networks; deep learning; information retrieval

The Neu-IR workshop will be a gathering of academic and
industrial researchers working at the intersection of IR and
neural networks. We solicit submission of papers of two to
six pages, representing reports of original research, preliminary research results, proposals for new work, descriptions
of neural network based toolkits tailored for IR, and position
papers. Papers presented at the workshop will be required
to be uploaded to arXiv.org but will be considered nonarchival, and may be submitted elsewhere (modified or not),
although the workshop site will maintain a link to the arXiv
versions. This makes the workshop a forum for the presentation and discussion of current work, without preventing
the work from being published elsewhere. We are interested
in submissions relevant to the following main themes:

Website: http://research.microsoft.com/neuir2016

1.

MOTIVATION

In recent years, deep neural networks have yielded significant performance improvements on speech recognition
and computer vision tasks [4, 7], as well as led to exciting
breakthroughs in novel application areas such as automatic
voice translation [8], image captioning [2, 12], and conversational agents [11]. Despite demonstrating good performance
on natural language processing (NLP) tasks (e.g., language
modelling [6] and machine translation [1]), the performance
of deep neural networks on information retrieval (IR) tasks
has had relatively less scrutiny. Recent work in this area
has mainly focused on word embeddings [3, 9, 14] and neural models for short text similarity [5, 10].
The lack of many positive results in this area of information retrieval is partially due to the fact that IR tasks such
as ranking are fundamentally different from NLP tasks, but
also because the IR and neural network communities are
only beginning to focus on the application of these techniques to core information retrieval problems. Given that
deep learning has made such a big impact, first on speech
processing and computer vision and now, increasingly, also
on computational linguistics, it seems clear that deep learning will have a major impact on information retrieval and
that this is an ideal time for a workshop in this area.
Neu-IR (pronounced “new IR”) will be a forum for new
research relating to deep learning and other neural network
based approaches to IR. The purpose is to provide an opportunity for people to present new work and early results, compare notes on neural network toolkits, share best practices,
and discuss the main challenges facing this line of research.

SCOPE

• The application of neural network models in IR tasks,
including but not limited to:
– Full text document retrieval, passage retrieval,
question answering
– Web search, searching social media, distributed
information retrieval, entity ranking
– Learning to rank combined with neural network
based representation learning
– User / task modelling, personalization, diversity
– Query formulation assistance, query recommendation, conversational search
– Multimedia retrieval
• Fundamental modelling challenges faced in such applications, including but not limited to:
– Learning dense representations for long documents
– Dealing with rare queries and rare words
– Modelling text at different granularities (character, word, passage, document)
– Compositionality of vector representations
– Jointly modelling queries, documents, entities and
other structured/knowledge data

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).

• Best practices for research and development in the
area, dealing with concerns such as:
–
–
–
–

SIGIR ’16 July 17-21, 2016, Pisa, Italy
c 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2917762

1245

Finding sufficient publicly-available training data
Baselines, test data, avoiding overfitting
Neural network toolkits
Real-world use cases, deployment at scale

3.

INTERACTION FORMAT

• Pavel Serdyukov, Yandex
• Fabrizio Silvestri, Yahoo Labs
• Alessandro Sordoni, University of Montreal

Neu-IR will be a highly interactive full day workshop, featuring a mix of presentation and interaction formats, appropriate for the main themes identified in §2. The workshop
will feature presentations of the following types:

References

•
•
•
•

Invited keynotes
Invited toolkit walkthrough on CNTK [13]
Contributed paper presentations
An interactive “Lessons from the Trenches” session to
share best practices and lessons learned
• Breakout sessions and panel discussions on issues that
emerge from the contributed papers

4.

[1] D. Bahdanau, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio. Neural machine
translation by jointly learning to align and translate.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.0473, 2014.
[2] H. Fang, S. Gupta, F. Iandola, R. Srivastava, L. Deng,
P. Dollár, J. Gao, X. He, M. Mitchell, J. Platt, et al.
From captions to visual concepts and back. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1411.4952, 2014.

ORGANIZERS

[3] D. Ganguly, D. Roy, M. Mitra, and G. J. Jones. Word
embedding based generalized language model for
information retrieval. In Proc. SIGIR, pages 795–798.
ACM, 2015.

Nick Craswell is a Principal Lead Researcher in Microsoft
Bing, working on core relevance. And leads a small team
of Applied Researchers who are embedded in Microsoft Research Cambridge in the UK. He has published a number of
papers relating to clicks and their use, and he ran the first
successful WSDM workshop on Web Search Click data in
2009, and co-organized WSCD workshops in 2012 and 2013.

[4] G. Hinton, L. Deng, D. Yu, G. E. Dahl, A.-r.
Mohamed, N. Jaitly, A. Senior, V. Vanhoucke,
P. Nguyen, T. N. Sainath, et al. Deep neural networks
for acoustic modeling in speech recognition: The
shared views of four research groups. Signal
Processing Magazine, IEEE, 29(6):82–97, 2012.

Bruce Croft is a Distinguished Professor in the College
of Information and Computer Sciences at the University of
Massachusetts Amherst. He leads the Center for Intelligent
Information Retrieval, which has produced results in many
areas of IR for the past 25 years.

[5] P.-S. Huang, X. He, J. Gao, L. Deng, A. Acero, and
L. Heck. Learning deep structured semantic models
for web search using clickthrough data. In Proc.
CIKM, pages 2333–2338. ACM, 2013.

Jiafeng Guo is an Associate Professor at Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He has
worked on a number of topics related to Web search and data
mining, including query representation and understanding,
learning to rank, and topic modelling. His current research
is focused on representation learning and deep models for
information retrieval and information filtering.

[6] R. Jozefowicz, O. Vinyals, M. Schuster, N. Shazeer,
and Y. Wu. Exploring the limits of language
modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.02410, 2016.
[7] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton. Deep learning.
Nature, 521(7553):436–444, 2015.
[8] W. D. Lewis. Skype translator: Breaking down
language and hearing barriers. In Translating and the
Computer (TC37), 2015.

Bhaskar Mitra is a Senior Applied Scientist at Bing in
Microsoft Research Cambridge. He started at Bing in 2007
(then called Live Search) at the Search Technology Center
in India. He is currently pursuing a (part-time) doctorate
at University College London. His research interests include
representation learning and neural networks, and in particular their application to modern day information retrieval.

[9] B. Mitra, E. Nalisnick, N. Craswell, and R. Caruana.
A dual embedding space model for document ranking.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.01137, 2016.
[10] A. Severyn and A. Moschitti. Learning to rank short
text pairs with convolutional deep neural networks. In
Proc. SIGIR, pages 373–382. ACM, 2015.

Maarten de Rijke is a Professor of Computer Science at
the Informatics Institute of the University of Amsterdam.
Together with a team of PhD students and postdocs he
works on problems on semantic search and on- and offline
learning to rank for information retrieval. Some of their recent work uses deep neural networks for text similarity, entity search, product search, session analysis, and click modelling.

5.

[11] O. Vinyals and Q. Le. A neural conversational model.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.05869, 2015.
[12] O. Vinyals, A. Toshev, S. Bengio, and D. Erhan. Show
and tell: A neural image caption generator. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1411.4555, 2014.
[13] D. Yu, A. Eversole, M. Seltzer, K. Yao, et al. An
introduction to computational networks and the
computational network toolkit. Technical report,
Tech. Rep. MSR, Microsoft Research, 2014,
https://cntk.ai/, 2014.

PROGRAM COMMITTEE
•
•
•
•
•
•

Carsten Eickhoff, ETH Zurich
Debasis Ganguly, Dublin City University
Katja Hoffman, Microsoft Research
Hang Li, Huawei Technologies
Piotr Mirowski, Google DeepMind
Alessandro Moschitti, Qatar Computing Research Inst.

[14] G. Zheng and J. Callan. Learning to reweight terms
with distributed representations. In Proc. SIGIR,
pages 575–584. ACM, 2015.

1246

