Medical Information Search Workshop (MEDIR)
Steven Bedrick

Lorraine Goeuriot

Gareth J. F. Jones

Oregon Health State
University
US

LIG - Université Grenoble
Alpes
France

Dublin City University
Ireland

bedricks@ohsu.edu
Anastasia Krithara

lorraine.goeuriot@imag.fr
Henning Mueller

NCSR Demokritos
Greece

HES-SO
Switzerland

gjones@computing.dcu.ie
George Paliouras
NCSR Demokritos
Greece

akrithara@iit.demokritos.gr henning.mueller@hevs.ch paliourg@iit.demokritos.gr
1.

WORKSHOP OVERVIEW

medical knowledge of different individuals within a category can also vary greatly.

Medical information search refers to methodologies and
technologies that seek to improve access to medical information archives via a process of information retrieval (IR).
Such information is now potentially accessible from many
sources including the general web, social media, journal articles, and hospital records. Health-related content is one of
the most searched-for topics on the internet, and as such this
is an important domain for research in information retrieval.
Medical information is of interest to a wide variety of
users, including patients and their families, researchers, general practitioners and clinicians, and clinicians with specific expertise such as radiologists. There are several dedicated services that seek to make this information more easily accessible, such as Health on the Net’s medical search
systems for the general public and medical practitioners1 .
Despite the popularity of the medical domain for users of
search engines, and current interest in this topic within the
information retrieval research community, development of
search and access technologies remains particularly challenging. One of the central challenges in medical information
search is diversity of the users of these services. These challenges can be summarized as follows:

3. Varying language skills: Given that much of medical
content is written in the English language, research to
date in medical information search has predominantly
focused on monolingual English retrieval. However,
given the large number of non-English speakers on the
Internet and the lack of content in their native language, effective support for them to search the English
sources is highly desirable.

1. Varying information needs: Understanding various types
of users and their information needs is one of the cornerstones of medical information search, while adapting information retrieval to best address these needs
to develop effective, potentially personalized systems
is one of its greatest challenges.
2. Varying medical knowledge: The different categories
of users of medical information search systems have
different levels of medical knowledge, and indeed the
1

http://www.hon.ch/

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).

The objective of this workshop is to provide a forum to enable the progression of research in medical information retrieval to provide enhanced search services for all users with
interest in medical information search.
This workshop aims to bring together researchers interested in medical information search with the goal of identifying specific research challenges that need to be addressed
to advance the state-of-the-art and to foster interdisciplinary
collaborations towards the meeting of these challenges. To
enable this, we will encourage participation from researchers
in all fields related to medical information search including
mainstream information retrieval, but also natural language
processing, multilingual text processing, and medical image
analysis.
Topics of interest include but are not limited to: Users and
information needs; Semantics and NLP for medical IR; Reliability and trust in medical IR; Personalised search; Evaluation of medical IR; Multilingual questions in medical IR;
Multimedia technologies in medical IR; The role of social
media in medical IR.
The workshop programme includes an invited presentation by Pr Bill Hersh, and short research and position papers describing approaches or challenges on the topics of the
workshop. The programme aims to encourage interaction
and discussion to develop a shared understanding of the research challenges facing the area of medical information retrieval. The workshop will seek to identify specific actions
necessary to advance this field, and to hopefully foster further collaborations between the participants.

Acknowledgement

SIGIR ’16 July 17-21, 2016, Pisa, Italy

We would like to thanks the European Science Foundation
project ELIAS for supporting this workshop.

c 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2917761

1243

