Privacy-Preserving IR 2016: Differential Privacy, Search,
and Social Media
Hui Yang

Ian Soboroff

Li Xiong

Georgetown University, USA

NIST, USA

Emory University, USA

huiyang@cs.georgetown.edu ian.soboroff@nist.gov
Charles L. A. Clarke

Simson L. Garfinkel

University of Waterloo,
Canada

simson.garfinkel@nist.gov

NIST, USA

claclark@plg.uwaterloo.ca
ABSTRACT

ergies and connections between these two disciplines. For
example, information retrieval researchers or practitioners
often need to consider privacy or security issues in designing solutions for information processing and management,
while researchers in information privacy and security often
utilize information retrieval techniques when they build the
adversary models to simulate how the adversary can actively
seek sensitive information. However, there have been only
limited efforts to connect the two important disciplines.
Due to lack of mature techniques in privacy-preserving information retrieval, concerns about information privacy and
security have become serious obstacles that prevent valuable
user data to be used in IR research such as studies about
query logs, social media, tweets, session analysis, and medical record retrieval. For instance, the recent TREC Medical
Record Retrieval Tracks are halted because of the privacy
issue and the TREC Microblog Tracks could not provide
participants with a standard testbed of tweets for system development. The situation needs to be improved in a timely
manner.
In addition, with the emergence of online social networks
and the growing popularity of digital communication, more
and more information about individuals is becoming available on the Internet. While much of this information is
not sensitive, it is not uncommon for users to publish sensitive information online, especially on social networking sites.
The availability of this publicly accessible and potentially
sensitive data can lead to abuse and expose users to stalking and identity theft. User privacy is at risk whenever
owners of publicly available network resources can be traced
and recorded, and their user activities can be mined and inferred. The digital ecosystem involves not only such threats
to personal privacy but also promising cures. For example,
information-theoretic protocols may decompose each user’s
query into several sub-queries, ensuring they include no information about the user’s intent.
All these motivate us to propose this “privacy-preserving
IR” workshop in SIGIR.

Due to lack of mature techniques in privacy-preserving information retrieval (IR), concerns about information privacy and security have become serious obstacles that prevent valuable user data to be used in IR research such as
studies on query logs, social media, and medical record retrieval. In SIGIR 2014 and SIGIR 2015, we have run the
privacy-preserving IR workshops exploring and understanding the privacy and security risks in information retrieval.
This year, we continue the efforts of connecting the two disciplines of IR and privacy/ security by organizing this workshop. We target on three themes, differential privacy and
IR dataset release, privacy in search and browsing, and privacy in social media. The workshop include panels with
researchers from both fields on these three themes, as well
as invite industry speakers for real-world challenges. The
goals of this workshop include (1) bringing together the two
research fields, and (2) yielding fruitful collaborations.

Keywords
Privacy-Preserving Information Retrieval

1.

lxiong@emory.edu

MOTIVATION

Information retrieval and information privacy/security are
two fast-growing computer science disciplines. Information
retrieval provides a set of information seeking, organization,
analysis, and decision-making techniques. Information privacy/security defends information from unauthorized or malicious use, disclosure, modification, attack, and destruction.
The two disciplines often appear as two areas with opposite
goals: one is to seek information from large amounts of materials, the other is to protect (sensitive) information from
being found out. On the other hand, there are many synPermission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).

2.

PAST WORKSHOPS

Since 2014, the privacy workshop has been running in SIGIR. The first privacy-preserving IR workshop (PIR 2014)
[5] received active participation. There were three keynotes
given in the workshop. Most workshop attendees agreed that

SIGIR ’16 July 17-21, 2016, Pisa, Italy
c 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2917763

1247

we need to continue to collaborate on this topic, and to seek
both general and specific solutions to the privacy and security issues in various IR tasks. The second workshop (PIR
2015) [7] started to receive solutions to the problems that
we identified in the previous year. It featured a keynote on
differential privacy and a heated debate on “privacy would
be resolved if the search is not personalized”. Both years’
workshop reports can be found in SIGIR forum too.

11:45-12:30
12:30-13:30
13:30-14:30
14:30-15:15
15:15-16:30
16:30-17:30
17:30-18:00

6.
3.

WHAT’S NEW

7.

References
[1] L. Fan, L. Bonomi, L. Xiong, and V. Sunderam.
Monitoring web browsing behavior with differential
privacy. In Proceedings of the 23rd International
Conference on World Wide Web, WWW ’14, 2014.

THEMES
• Differential privacy for IR data release [1, 2]: How to
preserve privacy when releasing internal data. For instance, web query logs and medical records could not
be shared without privacy concerns. Another challenge
is how to anonymize the datasets and make sure that
they can be shared with a certain degree of privacy
guaranteed while preserving the utility of the data. We
focus on the latest technology of differential privacy in
particular.

[2] M. Gaboardi, E. J. G. Arias, J. Hsu, A. Roth, and Z. S.
Wu. Dual query: Practical private query release for
high dimensional data. In ICML 2014, Beijing, China,
21-26 June 2014.
[3] W. Jiang, L. Si, and J. Li. Protecting source privacy in
federated search. In W. Kraaij, A. P. de Vries, C. L. A.
Clarke, N. Fuhr, and N. Kando, editors, SIGIR, pages
761–762. ACM, 2007.

• Privacy preserving search/browsing [3]: How to recognize and communicate privacy concerns to users of
search engines. It is important to develop effective and
efficient solutions to protect users’ privacy in information retrieval applications while they are searching or
surfing the net. We also plan to discuss softwares such
as TunnelBear1 .

[4] W. Luo, Q. Xie, and U. Hengartner. Facecloak: An
architecture for user privacy on social networking sites.
In CSE ’09 - Volume 03, pages 26–33, Washington, DC,
USA, 2009. IEEE Computer Society.
[5] L. Si and H. Yang. Pir 2014 the first international
workshop on privacy-preserving ir: When information
retrieval meets privacy and security. SIGIR Forum,
48(2):83–88, Dec. 2014.

• Privacy and social media [4, 6]: New information retrieval and natural language processing technologies
are needed to quickly identify components and/or attributes of a user’s online activities on social media
that may reduce the user’s privacy, and warn users
about their vulnerability on the Web. For instance,
authorship attribution.

[6] L. Singh, G. H. Yang, M. Sherr, A. Hian-Cheong,
K. Tian, J. Zhu, and S. Zhang. Public information
exposure detection: Helping users understand their web
footprints. In ASONAM 2015, Paris, France.
[7] H. Yang and I. Soboroff. Privacy-preserving IR 2015:
When information retrieval meets privacy and security.
In SIGIR’15 , Santiago, Chile, August 9-13, 2015.

ACTIVITIES AND SCHEDULE

This full day workshop includes invited speakers, panels,
short contributed talks and a poster session. It ends with a
breakout session. The activities are scheduled as the following:
09:00-09:30 Welcome and Introduction.
09:30-10:30 Invited speaker #1 (Differential privacy)
10:30-11:00 Coffee
11:00-11:45 Contributed talks (session #1)
1

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research was supported by NSF grant CNS-1223825,
DARPA grant FA8750-14-2-0226, and NSF student travel
grant. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this paper are of the authors, and do not
necessarily reflect those of the sponsor. We also express our
special thanks to our student organizer, Sicong Zhang.

The three main themes of this year including the following.

5.

WEBSITE

The website of the workshop can be found at privacypreservingir.
org.

This year, the workshop organizers formed a team spanning across IR, Privacy, and the government sector. We
focus on forming IR and privacy research bridges and partnerships and thus organizing panels by themes. For each
theme, we invite researchers from IR and researchers from
Privacy/Security to form pairs. The panel discussion not
only focus on presenting problems but more on seeking solutions and achieving a mutual understanding of the research
problem. Among many challenges in privacy-preserving IR,
this year we focus on three major themes: differential privacy for IR data release, privacy-preserving search/browsing
and privacy and social media.

4.

Posters flowing into Lunch
Lunch
Invited speaker #2 (Industry)
Contributed talks (session #2)
Panel and breakout planning
Breakouts (research challenges)
Summary of breakouts

https://www.tunnelbear.com/

1248

