HIA’16: The 2nd International Workshop on Heterogeneous
Information Access at SIGIR 2016
Ke Zhou

Yiqun Liu

Yahoo Research
London, U.K.

Tsinghua University
Beijing, China

kezhou@yahoo-inc.com

yiqunliu@tsinghua.edu.cn

Roger Jie Luo

Joemon Jose

Snapchat
Venice Beach, USA

University of Glasgow
Glasgow, U.K.

roger.luo@snapchat.com Joemon.Jose@glasgow.ac.uk
ABSTRACT

The main objective of the workshop is to draw researchers’
attention to this rising field as well as to inspire them to collaborate in order to further promote the research area of
heterogeneous information access. Although many studies
have been conducted in the past on distributed information retrieval (homogeneous search federation) [6], there are
multiple challenges emerging in the heterogeneous information access space. The new challenges include but are not
limited to: How to select the most relevant resources and
present them concisely in order to best satisfy the user; How
to model the complex user behaviors while interacting with
heterogeneous search systems; How to evaluate the performance of these systems; How to optimize the system for the
increasing popular mobile experience. We would like to create a forum to encourage discussion and exchange of ideas
on heterogeneous information access in different contexts.
To facilitate the discussion, we encourage submissions on
ideas and results from different aspects of heterogeneous information access, including aggregated search [1], composite
retrieval [2], personal search [5], structured search [4], proactive heterogeneous card recommendation [7], etc. Another
objective of the workshop is to encourage submissions with
novel ideas (e.g. new applications) on heterogeneous information access and potential future research directions.

Information access is becoming increasingly heterogeneous.
Especially when the user’s information need is for exploratory
purpose, returning a set of diverse results from different resources could benefit the user. For example, when a user
is planning a trip to China, retrieving and showing results
from vertical search engines like travel, flight information,
map and Q2A sites can satisfy the user’s rich and diverse
information need. This heterogeneous search paradigm is
useful in many contexts and brings many new challenges.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.3.3 [Information Retrieval][Information Search and Retrieval]
Keywords: Heterogeneous; Federated search; Aggregated
search; Composite retrieval; Card recommendation.

1.

INTRODUCTION

The environment where users interact within is becoming increasingly heterogeneous. On the Web, we have now
many search engines, so-called verticals, each targeting a
specific type of information (e.g. image, news, video) to satisfy the user’s information need [3]. Aggregating search results from those heterogeneous verticals has become de-facto
search paradigm (aggregated search) in commercial search
engines [1, 8]. It is also common that users search their own
desktop (e.g. Spotlight) to re-find or browse different types
of files (codes, documents, emails) when aiming to fulfill a
given work task [5]. More recently, systems such as Google
Now, Apple Siri and Microsoft Cortana aim to proactively
recommend heterogeneous cards (e.g. weather, stocks, news,
calendar) to the users, even without users to issue the query
[7]. Due to the rising heterogeneous nature of the information that users can access, numerous challenges have arisen.

2.

REFERENCES

[1] J. Arguello, F. Diaz, J. Callan, and J.-F. Crespo. Sources of
evidence for vertical selection. In SIGIR ’09, pages 315–322.
[2] H. Bota, K. Zhou, J. Jose, and M. Lalmas. Composite retrieval
of heterogeneous web search. In WWW’14, pages 119–130.
[3] T. Demeester, D. Trieschnigg, D. Nguyen, K. Zhou and
D. Hiemstra. Overview of the TREC 2014 Federated Web
Search Track. In TREC’14. Proceedings of Text REtrieval
Conference.
[4] D. Herzig, and T. Thanh. Heterogeneous web data search using
relevance-based on the fly data integration. In WWW ’12,
pages 141–150.
[5] K. Jinyoung, and W. B. Croft. Ranking using multiple
document types in desktop search. In SIGIR’10, pages 50–57.
[6] M. Shokouhi and S. Luo. Federated search. In FTIIR’11,
Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval, pages 1-102.
[7] M. Shokouhi and Q. Guo. From Queries to Cards, Re-ranking
Proactive Card Recommendations Based on Reactive Search
History. In SIGIR’15, pages 695–704.
[8] K. Zhou, R. Cummins, M. Lalmas and J. Jose. Evaluating
Aggregated Search Pages. In SIGIR’12, pages 115–124.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).

SIGIR ’16 July 17-21, 2016, Pisa, Italy
c 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2917760

1241

