Big Data in Climate:
Opportunities and Challenges for Machine Learning
Vipin Kumar
University of Minnesota

kumar@cs.umn.edu
ABSTRACT
This talk will present an overview of research being done in a
large interdisciplinary project on the development of novel data
mining and machine learning approaches for analyzing massive
amount of climate and ecosystem data now available from
satellite and ground-based sensors, and physics-based climate
model simulations. These information-rich data sets offer huge
potential for monitoring, understanding, and predicting the
behavior of the Earth's ecosystem and for advancing the science of
global change. This talk will discuss challenges in analyzing such
data sets and some of our research results in mapping the
dynamics of surface water globally as well as detecting
deforestation and fires in tropical forests using data from Earth
observing satellites.

Keywords
Big data; spatio-temporal data; predictive models for imperfect,
incomplete, and heterogeneous data; rare class detection;
monitoring global water dynamics; identifying tropical forest
fires.

Short Biography
Vipin Kumar is a Regents Professor at the University of
Minnesota, where he holds the William Norris Endowed Chair in
the Department of Computer Science and Engineering. Kumar's
current research interests include data mining, high-performance
computing, and their applications in Climate/Ecosystems and
Biomedical domains. Kumar is the Lead PI of a 5-year, $10
Million project, "Understanding Climate Change - A Data Driven
Approach" funded by the NSF's Expeditions in Computing
program. This project is focused on the development of novel
data driven approaches to help understand climate change and its
impact. He has authored over 300 research articles, and has
coedited or coauthored 10 books including two text books
``Introduction to Parallel Computing'' and ``Introduction to Data
Mining'', that are used world-wide and have been translated into
many languages.
Kumar co-founded SIAM International
Conference on Data Mining and served as a founding co-editorin-chief of Journal of Statistical Analysis and Data Mining (an
official journal of the American Statistical Association). Kumar is
a Fellow of the ACM, IEEE and AAAS. He received the
Distinguished Alumnus Award from the Indian Institute of
Technology (IIT) Roorkee (2013), the Distinguished Alumnus
Award from the Computer Science Department, University of
Maryland College Park (2009), and IEEE Computer Society's
Technical Achievement Award (2005). Kumar's foundational
research in data mining and its applications to scientific data was
honored by the ACM SIGKDD 2012 Innovation Award, which is
the highest award for technical excellence in the field of
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD).

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other
uses, contact the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’16, July 17 - 21, 2016, Pisa, Italy.
ACM 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07

DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2911550

3

