Going back in Time:
An Investigation of Social Media Re-finding
Florian Meier

David Elsweiler

I:IMSK
University of Regensburg
Germany

I:IMSK
University of Regensburg
Germany

florian.meier@ur.de

david@elsweiler.co.uk

ABSTRACT

from which a Tweet may be located. The heart icon labels a
Tweet as a “favourite” (FAV) and again places the message in
a separate space. Studies have confirmed that both features
are indeed used with the intention of preserving [3, 32]. New
features have recently been added to SMAs to help users return to previously viewed content e.g. Facebook has the
“read it later” button and Whatsapp has introduced a star
icon. Moreover, as of November 2014 Twitter offers users the
ability to search over the complete dataset of Tweets, unrestricted by age. Investigations of Twitter search behaviour
do provide some evidence of re-finding [15]. Nevertheless, in
transaction log studies of SM search behaviour, interactions
often associated with re-finding (e.g. repeated queries) have
been attributed instead to monitoring behaviour due to the
perception of SM posts as a shallow, ephemeral media [47].
Thus there is uncertainty in the literature with respect
to the frequency with which SM content is re-found and
the lifespans of posts for individual users. Moreover little is
known about how users re-find content on SMAs, the difficulties they experience or the support they require. In this
paper we contribute by reporting the results of a naturalistic, log-based investigation of user interactions with the
Twitter website. Our specific contributions are as follows:

Social Media (SM) has become a valuable information source
to many in diverse situations. In IR, research has focused
on real-time aspects and as such little is known about how
long SM content is of value to users, if and how often it is
re-accessed, the strategies people employ to re-access and if
difficulties are experienced while doing so. We present results from a 5 month-long naturalistic, log-based study of
user interaction with Twitter, which suggest re-finding to
be a regular activity and that Tweets can offer utility for
longer than one might think. We shed light on re-finding
strategies revealing that remembered people are used as a
stepping stone to Tweets rather than searching for content
directly. Bookmarking strategies reported in the literature
are used infrequently as a means to re-access. Finally, we
show that by using statistical modelling it is possible to predict if a Tweet has future utility and is likely to be re-found.
Our findings have implications for the design of social media
search systems and interfaces, in particular for Twitter, to
better support users re-find previously seen content.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Information re-finding is the behaviour exhibited to access
previously seen or possessed information [27]. People regularly re-find items of different kinds including documents
[12], emails [50], photos and web pages [42, 5, 44] and in
these contexts re-finding can be a frustrating, time consuming and expensive task [27]. It is less clear if re-finding is so
pervasive and challenging within social media applications
(SMA) where the focus is often on real-time information
[47] and information exchange [33] and where much of the
content has been identified as disposable, “mindless babble”
[25].
Nevertheless, some SMAs have features explicitly designed
to prolong content lifespans. Examples include retweeting
(RT) and the heart icon (formerly star) on Twitter. A RT
allows users to forward Tweets to their followers and places
these amongst the user’s sent messages - a separate space

• We present a dataset of click stream interactions with
the Twitter website, revealing patterns of user behaviour
not possible with data collected via the API.
• We identify re-finding behaviour using specific interaction sequences as a proxy. This indicates that refinding occurs and that the life-cycle of many Tweets
is longer than the literature suggests.
• We examine the relationship between FAV-ing, RT-ing
and re-finding and discover that if people are trying
to bookmark Tweets for future use as the literature
suggests, they are not doing so with any great success.
• We investigate re-finding strategies by studying the
features of Twitter used to re-access messages.
• Finally, based on our initial discoveries we test several groups of predictive features to determine that it
is possible to predict with reasonable accuracy which
Tweets will be re-found in the future.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR’16, July 17-21, 2016, Pisa, Italy
c 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07 ...$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2911524.

2.

RELATED WORK

We overview three research areas of relevance to our work:
(i) Twitter behaviour studies informing on the life-cycle of
Tweets. (ii) Re-finding behaviour in disparate domains as

355

well as related personal information management (PIM) activities. (iii) Studies investigating PIM behaviour on Twitter, which links (i) and (ii) and motivates our specific research questions.
(i) Insights into Life-cycle of Tweets: Twitter is
used for diverse purposes including conversing [22], sharing thoughts [33], monitoring topics for up-to-date information [29], establishing social capital [24] and even political
mobilisation [6]. None of these use cases, however, suggest
that the distributed content holds any long-term utility for
Tweet consumers and Twitter’s emphasis on the present, the
popular and the ephemeral has been well documented [38].
Twitter creator Jack Dorsey underlined the ephemerality of
his service, stating: “[I] don’t go back in time. You’re kind
of as good as your last update.”1 .
The RT feature can extend the global life-cycle of a Tweet
by propagating it over the network [29]. This means that
even very old content can enter a user’s timeline in the same
way as new Tweets. Although half of all RTs occur within a
day, 10% of RTs do take place at least one month later [29]
with the probability decreasing with time from the Tweet’s
arrival in a user’s Timeline [29, 21]. One reason for this
is that a Tweet’s visibility to a user decreases rapidly - a
major barrier to information propagation leading to short
Tweet life-cycles overall [21]. Several other features have
been identified as good predictors for whether or not a Tweet
will be RT’d including social attributes of the users involved,
e.g. number of followers, number of followees and how often
the user has been added to lists; as well as presence of URLs
and hashtags in Tweets [36, 23, 41]. Thus, although the
life-cycle of Tweets is typically short, Tweets can have long
life-cycles over several Twitter users2 , but it is unclear how
long Tweets are useful for individual users.
(ii) Personal Information Management (PIM) is
the field concerned with behaviours related to the management of information [27]. Those most pertinent to our work
are 1) re-finding, for which the literature describes strategies
people employ, identifies patterns in re-finding behaviour,
difficulties they have and the system features that can help
and 2) the keeping decision, which influences what people
will remember about their information and consequently,
how it will be re-found [42, 12, 44, 14, 4].
Prominent re-finding strategies are orienteering and teleporting [1, 37, 45]. The former utilises recognition by navigating spatially or by using contextual information to narrow in on the sought-after information. It can consist of a
series of different browsing and searching actions. The latter involves recalling detailed information about an item to
navigate to it directly e.g. typing the URL of a web page
into the browser or submitting elaborate search queries. The
strategy employed will be influenced by numerous factors including the type of item (e.g. email vs web page), elapsed
time between access and re-access and previously applied
keeping decisions and re-finding actions [7].
The decision to keep information can be error prone as
it depends on a user’s ability to anticipate personal future
information needs [4] and the value of encountered information is often only realised long after it has been initially seen
(post-valued recall) [49]. Although keeping actions can support later re-finding, often users decide not to keep and rely

on search systems for re-access and this can be problematic
[5]. Keeping information is not a guaranteed solution either, however, as people often forget that they did so [26],
cannot recall where they stored the information or the organisational structures fail [50, 12, 14]. Re-finding can be
supported algorithmically [39, 8] or with interactive features,
such as search histories [28], changes to the appearance or
ordering of results [43, 46] or different organisational structures based on e.g. tagging [9].
(iii) PIM on Twitter: Only recently have researchers
turned to Twitter as an object of study in PIM. An investigation of motivations for RTing showed that the feature
is important not only for message propogation, but also for
extending a Tweet’s personal life-cycle with users reporting
RTing to preserve Tweets [3]. A similar study of favouriting
revealed 25 motivations including bookmarking, either with
an anticipated need in mind or with the aim of building a
personal collection [32]. Researchers have also attempted
to predict whether a favourited Tweet was for liking, bookmarking, self-promotion, as part of a conversation or gratitude [18].
Re-finding on Twitter can be frustrating, primarily for
very active users who follow many accounts and who typically take steps to preserve Tweets of interest [31]. Teevan
et al. [47] analysed Twitter search query logs captured via
the Bing toolbar. Repeated queries - which in other contexts
are attributed to re-finding - were interpreted as monitoring.
However, the same authors later note that older posts can
be of value to users, but as the Twitter search only returns
the most recent Tweets, searching for older Tweets occurs
infrequently [13]. A long term diary study found that 40%
of users reported reasons for using the search function are
related to finding previously viewed information [15].
With Twitter now a valuable source of information to
many a certain research deficit exists as we lack a detailed
understanding of keeping and re-finding practices on this
platform. Our study aims to address this by investigating
personal Tweet life-cycles, keeping and re-finding strategies,
and features of Tweets that make them candidates for refinding.

3.

STUDY METHODOLOGY

Although the Twitter API offers a simple and cost-effective
way to source behavioural data, the data is limited to traces
resulting from active engagement with certain features of
the service e.g. RTing. In this work, we collect a much
richer and complete naturalistic data-set by also accounting for more latent Twitter usage e.g. stream consumption
(reading and clicking Tweets) and sub-page navigation.

3.1

Chrome Extension

We developed a Chrome web-browser extension to collect user interactions with the Twitter website. The extension logged metadata from Tweets viewed or interacted
with (moused-over, clicked on, FAV’d, RT’d etc.) and the
context in which the interaction took place (i.e. personal
timeline (Timline Event), another user’s profile page (UserProfile Event), search results page (Search Event), on the
favourite’s list (Favourites Event) etc.). Interactions, such
as search queries, mouse movement and scrolling were also
recorded.

1
http://latimesblogs.latimes.com/technology/2009/02/jackdorsey-on.html
2
Even the first ever Tweet posted featured in our logs.

356

Figure 1: Overview on session behaviour for users

(n=27)
Tweets(n)
Following Count(n)
Follower Count(n)
Favourites Count(n)
Registered (years) (NA=12)

min

max

mean

median

0
4
0
0
2

73 780
1041
1139
44520
6

5637
203
202.5
1796
4.6

59
57
39
18.50
5

per user varies greatly; the sharp slope indicating a heavy
long-tailed distribution. 75% of participants completed 46
sessions or less. For about 80% of participants, the average
number of events per session completed (shown in (c)) was
below 100 events and peaks at around 300. Finally (d) indicates that 40% of participants performed 1 session per day
on average, a quarter of participants completed 2 or more
sessions and the maximum number of sessions per day was
10. These plots underline very different patterns of usage
across participants.

Table 1: Participant account properties

3.2

Setup and Participants
Most events occurred in the context of participants’ home
timeline (72.40%). The second most common context was
the profile site of other users (10.10% ) followed by the notifications page (7.50%). Other contexts/event categories featured infrequently. Only 3.05% of events were search events
or occurred on the Twitter SERP page and even fewer come
from favourites lists (0.30%). In fact only 8 participants
(18.20%) visited their favourites list at all. This aligns with
the findings of a previous study where users reported rarely
or never examining their favourites [32].
In total 143,721 unique Tweets appear in the logs. 273,550
references to these were collected, of which 146,735 are unique
user-tweets (i.e. the same Tweet was counted twice if it appeared in the logs of two users). Of such Tweets, 3.76%
received a special interaction (FAV=3.10%, RT=0.24%,
RT+FAV=0.35%). Again, stark differences in behaviour can
be observed across users. 23 (52.27%) participants FAV’d
or RT’d. Twitter feature usage can be heavily skewed, e.g.
4,186 (83.00%) favouriting actions were performed by a single, dominant user. The same user had by a considerable
margin the highest number of favourited Tweets (Table 1).
The average age of a viewed Tweet was 28.1 hours (median=1.44 hours, max=80667 hours (9 years), IQR=11.02
hours). These statistics indicate that Twitter is perhaps not
as real-time as people may think. Figure 2 plots the age of
Tweets when viewed, showing that 52,340 (19.13%) Tweets
were not viewed within a day of being posted. Although the
vast majority of Tweets are fresh (orange points) - as would
be expected with a real-time platform - a good number of
Tweets are in fact relatively old when viewed. This is a first
hint that certain Tweets may have an extended life-cycle.
The analyses in this section demonstrate: 1) diverse behaviour across participants, 2) that users spend most time
on their own timelines and rarely access their favourites list
or own profile, 3) that users interact with old Tweets - a
first clue that re-finding may occur.

Participants were recruited in various ways including advertising on Twitter, mailing lists and posts on diverse Internet fora. Over a five month period, lasting from the end
of March to the end of August 2015, 44 Twitter users downloaded and installed the extension. We could establish background information for 27 of these users as we were able to
reliably map these to an Twitter account3 . However all 44
subjects feature in the analyses.
Achieving a representative sample of Twitter users with
this kind of study is close to impossible. Our aim was rather
to achieve a sample as large and diverse as possible to provide insight into the re-finding practices of a relatively heterogeneous group of users. Table 1 summarises basic participant account statistics, indicating a reasonably diverse
sample in terms of how and how often they use Twitter.
Although we did not survey participants for demographic
information, examining their accounts reveals divergent educational backgrounds, work situations and users based in
many countries, prominently in Germany, USA and the UK.

4.

GENERAL TWITTER BEHAVIOUR

Applying 5 minutes inactivity as session threshold as in
previous social media studies [40] resulted in a total of 4573
sessions for all users. The number of events per session
ranges from 2 to 2155 (median=11, IQR=31). A session
lasted on average slightly over 4 minutes but the longest
session lasted over 3 hours (median=83sec, IQR=270sec).
These figures are in line with session characteristics reported
in other social media log studies [40, 2]. The number of
events per session and session duration are highly correlated
(Pearson r=0.90) indicating that participants were typically
very engaged when using Twitter.
Figures 1(a)-(d) present an overview of general session
behaviour: (a) examines the average session length per user
and shows that for 50% of users the average session lasted
320sec or longer. (b) shows that the number of sessions
3

Identification required the user to visit their own profile
page. Participants consented to establishing background information via the API.

357

unique
user-tweets
146735
Hover or Click
Click only

Tweets
interacted
40486 (27.59%)
8320 (5.67%)

Tweets
interacted
with SI
4847 (11.97%)
4743 (57.00%)

Re-interacted
Tweets
without SI
375 (7.73%)
134 (3.75%)

Re-interacted
Tweets
with SI
3996 (11.21%)
85 (1.79%)

Table 2: The proxies re-interacted and re-click in
detail. SI stands for special interaction i.e. Tweets
that got RT’d or FAV’d.

number of followers may implicitly mouse-over older Tweets
due to a lack of new content in their stream and several
re-interactions may result from a single re-finding intention.
A further method of identifying re-finding in the logs is to
use a repeated click pair across sessions as has been used in
web [44, 48], email [19] and desktop search contexts [12]. In
streamed data like Twitter, where there is a heavy focus on
the newest information, it is also a comparatively conservative proxy as it is very unlikely that users accidentally click
on an older message that they have previously clicked on as
part of general interactions with the service.
Using this proxy 17 participants (38.64%) re-find and they
do so with varying frequency (1.29% - 15.35% of clicked
Tweets are re-clicked in a future session). Using re-clicks
as a proxy results in 276 re-finding actions of 219 unique
Tweets across 176 different sessions. This indicates that refinding sessions can contain multiple instances of re-finding
and some Tweets (55) can be re-accessed several times across
multiple sessions (median=2, max=3).
We have presented three different proxies that can be used
to identify re-finding. Figure 3 summarises what these show
regarding the frequency of re-finding sessions, tweets and
users. The most conservative proxy reduces false positives,
but comes at the cost of missing many potential re-finding
actions as 95% of Tweets were not clicked at all and thus
cannot be identified as being re-found using this approach.
The true re-finding frequency probably lies within the range
suggested by the three proxies. Nevertheless we focus on
repeated clicks beyond sessions in the remainder of the paper as when describing re-finding behaviour, we want to be
as sure as possible that what we are describing is indeed
re-finding. Figure 3 shows that taking re-clicks as a proxy
dramatically reduces the number of re-finding instances to

Figure 2: Age of viewed Tweets

5.

INVESTIGATING RE-FINDING

The following sections analyse various aspects of re-finding.
First, by comparing different proxies for the behaviour, we
examine its frequency and how it varies across the participants. Next we look at temporal patterns in Tweet re-access.
Finally, we look at re-finding behaviour in detail by examining the differences between re-finding and non-re-finding
sessions and analysing the steps involved.

5.1

Re-finding Frequency

Several methods for identifying re-finding behaviour in
naturalistic log data have been reported in the literature:
using interaction sequences as a proxy [44, 48, 19], supervised learning approaches with a manually annotated training set [16] and pairing repeated session goals as produced
by a classifier [39]. We employ the approach taken in equivalent early studies in web search, that is we utilise particular
interaction patterns as a proxy for re-finding [44, 48]. We
investigate several proxies before settling on the conservative approach of examining instances of repeated clicks on
Tweets.
Table 2 shows that only ∼30% of all Tweets that appeared
on the participants’ timeline were interacted with explicitly
and 12% of these receive a special interaction. This could
mean that many Tweets are never read or that the content
of many Tweets requires no mouse-over or click in order to
be consumed. Interpreting the logs in this second manner
would mean that many of the older Tweets in Figure 2 could
be treated as re-finding, although it is difficult to say which.
Classifying viewed Tweets older than the median age would
result in 25.30% of all seen as being re-found with 93.18%
of participants doing this at some point during the study.
This is an extremely liberal proxy and would very likely
over-estimate the frequency with which re-finding occurs.
A more accurate proxy is to consider Tweets that were explicitly interacted with multiple times across sessions. 11%
of the interacted-with Tweets were interacted with again in
a future session. Taking cross-session interactions as a proxy
for re-finding means that 34 (77%) participants can be considered to have re-found at some point in the study with
the proportion of their Tweets being re-found varying from
0.43% to 30%. On average 10.13% of Tweets are interactedwith across sessions. Again this probably over-estimates
the frequency of re-finding. For instance users with a low

Figure 3: The three proxies (age, re-interaction
across sessions and re-click across sessions) in comparison of number of re-finding sessions, Tweets refound and users re-finding.

358

which Tweets are re-clicked. Here we discover that re-finding
via user profile pages is a common strategy. Therefore, in a
final step, we look more closely at how participants navigate
to user profiles. This provides insight into what people remember about sought-after Tweets and how they make use
of these recollections when re-finding.

5.3.1

To discover how re-finding differs from typical Twitter usage we compare the 176 re-finding sessions with 176 randomly sampled non-re-finding sessions. Using appropriate
(Bonferroni corrected) non-parametric tests revealed 34 session features with significantly differing distributions. Refinding sessions are longer in terms of session duration (492
secs vs 76), have more events in general (75.81 vs 29.66)
and more search interactions (2.17 vs 0.37). Moreover, interactions were more likely to be in contexts other than
the home timeline. During re-finding sessions more Tweets
were viewed (75.51 vs 28.70), hovered over (16.24 vs 9.35)
and clicked (5.14 vs 1.24). Also, relating to heavy downward scrolling (10416.44 px vs 5322.73) and mouse movement, participants tended to view Tweets much deeper in
the timeline (25.62 vs 11.87) and consequently encounter
older Tweets. The average age of a Tweet viewed in a
re-finding session was typically much older than in nonrefinding sessions (11.60 days vs 7.50). Finally, during refinding sessions more user profiles are visited (0.75 vs 0.28)
raising the questions of why this is the case and how users
achieve this.
In summary, re-finding sessions are longer and contain
more extensive and more varied behaviour. The analyses
paint the picture of re-finding being much harder work than
normal Twitter use.

Figure 4: Temporal Patterns of Re-clicks

investigate. Nevertheless, even this conservative proxy suggests re-finding to be a pervasive activity affecting over one
third of the users.

5.2

Personal Tweet Life-cycles

The period between the first click and a re-click on a
Tweet sheds light on the personal life-cycle of re-accessed
Tweets i.e. the period for which the Tweet or its content
has utility to an individual user. Figure 4 shows that the
personal life-cycle of a Tweet is typically short: half of all refinding actions happen within a day (median time between
click and re-click = 18.8 hours, mean=217 hours (9 days)).
The longest personal life-cycle in our logs was 52 days, which
we find surprisingly long for a medium known as ephemeral
and suggests that Twitter content can hold utility several
weeks after it is first encountered. Many repeated clicks
happen within one day, yet the period between 1 day and
1 week shows far fewer clicks. Once a period of a week has
past the frequency of re-clicks rises again. Moreover Figure 4
illustrates how special interactions and re-finding period relate. Different point colours show whether or not re-clicked
Tweets were FAV’d or RT’d. The percentage of specially
interacted Tweets is very high in the short re-click period
group (61.60%), whereas in the long re-click period group
this is not the case (10.44%).
Previous work has suggested that both RT and FAV are
signs of relevance [36] and used as a means to “bookmark”
a Tweet for future use. Intuitively, therefore, one would assume that Tweets interacted with in these ways would be
more likely to be re-found across a longer time period compared to Tweets not marked as a FAV or RT’d. Figure 4
indicates the opposite to be the case. The proportion of
Tweets (61.60%) with special interaction amongst Tweets
with a short re-click period (<median) is much higher than
the proportion among Tweets (10.44%) that are re-clicked
after a long period (>median). A chi-square test confirms
this relationship, showing a highly significant effect of special interaction on re-click period (χ2 =77.18, df=1, p<0.05,
φ=0.536, Odds-Ratio: 14). The odds ratio indicates the
chance of a Tweet being re-clicked after a long re-click period is 14 times higher for Tweets which have not been
FAV’d and/or RT’d. The results suggest that users seem to
favourite and/or re-tweet a Tweet whose relevance is immediately obvious and short-term, but struggle with assessing
the future utility of encountered Tweets over longer periods.

5.3

Examining re-finding sessions

5.3.2

Examining re-finding strategies

Here we characterise re-finding by looking at the different
contexts in which re-clicks on Tweets occur. This relates to
the strategies people employ.
As in Section 5.2, we divide the re-clicked Tweets in short
re-click period (<median) and long re-click period (>median) and examine the URL in which the re-clicks take place.
Figure 5 shows the distribution of re-click contexts. In short
re-click periods the dominant context is the Timeline (65%),
illustrating that often users need not leave their own stream
to re-access content. This also means, however, that if a

Re-finding Behaviour

Figure 5: Comparison of different re-click contexts
corresponding to re-finding strategies for short and
long re-click periods.

We examine re-finding behaviour in 3 stages. We start by
comparing re-finding with non-re-finding sessions. Next we
investigate re-finding strategies by analysing the contexts in

359

large number of active users are followed and if some time
has passed since the Tweet was last seen, the user will be
required to scroll a lot. This aligns with the findings in Section 5.3.1 where re-finding sessions were shown to contain
significantly more scrolling. 25% of Tweets are re-accessed
via the Notifications page. Other re-access strategies, such
as keyword search (2.1%) or strategies that require certain
preserving behaviour upfront e.g. FAVing (2.1%) or RTing
(1.4%) are infrequently used. Thus, even if people are able
to correctly predict they will need a Tweet in the future and
bookmark - which Section 5.2 suggests to sometimes be the
case for short time periods - they rarely make use of the
bookmark when re-accessing.
The pattern changes dramatically for Tweets with a long
re-click period. Re-finding via the notifications page or the
Timeline decrease to ∼5%. Re-finding Tweets via the
favourites list (2.9%) stays fairly constant, whereas search
drops below 1%. In contrast re-finding via the own posted
Tweets increases to about 5%. The context in which almost
all Tweets get re-clicked, however, is another user’s profile
page with 78.9% of re-accesses occurring in this context.
This is of note as it suggests users associate Tweets with the
author or poster of a Tweet or at least have a vague idea
of who might have posted it. The fact that the author or
sender of an information item is well remembered is known
from previous PIM studies [12, 16] including on Twitter [10].
Surprisingly, it seems features designed to prolong Tweet
life-cycles, such as FAVing and RTing are not the contexts
in which Tweets are re-found. Instead Tweets tend to be reaccessed by scrolling either on the home timeline (after short
periods) or another user’s timeline (after long periods).

5.3.3

Top 5 bi-grams (N=33)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Home site visit, Search
PSV, Click on user name
PSV, Click on user profile picture
PSV, Click on author of recent Tweet
PSV, Click on ”complete profile” button

24% (N=8)
15% (N=5)
15% (N=5)
9% (N=3)
9% (N=3)

Table 3: Top 5 bi-grams events preceding a user profile event. PSV stands for profile summary viewed.

5.3.4

Summary

Section 5.1 showed that even on SMAs, which focus on
real-time information, the re-finding of older information is
prevalent and Tweets can offer utility for long time periods.
The literature suggests that regardless of domain, re-finding
can be challenging and frustrating [14, 31, 39] and the results
in Section 5.3.1 seem to support this. Section 5.3.3 showed
that teleporting strategies (e.g. searching directly to re-find
Tweets) are almost never applied. Instead orienteering is
preferred to narrow down on desired content. Orienteering
can be search-based, where users submit queries to navigate
to a specific context before browsing or link-based, where
existing hypertext links are followed to navigate stepwise.

6.

PREDICTING RE-FINDING

As users struggle with assessing the future utility of Tweets,
we wanted to test how effective automated algorithms can be
at predicting which Tweets will be re-clicked in the future.

6.1

Re-finding Paths

Experimental Setup

We perform modelling experiments framed as a binary
classification problem where the positive class consists of
217 of the re-clicked Tweets analysed above5 . To attain
217 Tweets in the negative class we first randomly draw 100
clicked Tweets from each user who re-clicked a Tweet during
the study. This is important as we do not want to bias the
sample by including too many clicks from users who did not
re-click at all. We then sample 217 non-re-clicked Tweets
randomly from this set.
15 models are compared with varying degrees of complexity, in terms of the number of predictive features and
the costs incurred in obtaining these features. 10-fold-crossvalidation is performed on every iteration using a Random
Forest classifier, as it has proven to be robust for classification problems [17]. We also experimented with other classifiers including SVM, but none of these resulted in better
performance. Therefore only results from the Random Forest experiments are reported, specifying F1, accuracy and
the area under the ROC curve (AUC).

Next, we look more closely at the paths people take to reaccess Tweets. We do this by examining bi-gram events, i.e.
two consecutive actions occurring prior to a user profile visit
which, as we saw previously, was the most common context
in which Tweets were re-accessed after longer time periods.
Table 3 shows the top 5 bi-gram events preceding a user
profile event in re-finding sessions. The most frequent bigram is a home timeline visit followed by a search query.
30% of profile visits are proceeded by a search event. This
suggests that although re-clicks did not occur in search contexts, search is still important as it is used to locate people
associated with the sought-after information. Users exhibit
orienteering behaviour, narrowing down on the information
source by searching for the user, before browsing through
the user’s posted Tweets to re-find the desired Tweet. This
fits the well known phenomenon in information seeking that
people prefer to locate information via other people [20].
The remaining bi-grams all share one common event: the
profile summary view.4 By clicking on a mention or the
Tweet author name the profile summary view is the link
leading a participant to a user’s complete profile and his
posted Tweets. This shows participants’ use of navigational
links i.e. orienteering to get to user profiles. Overall 70% of
bi-grams can be attributed as link-based orienteering solely
relying on a browsing strategy.

6.2

Features

In our modelling we used four groups of predictive features
(listed in detail in Table 4):
Tweet features describe general characteristics of Tweets
with respect to their text (CharCount, WordCount), part
of speech information (POSTags) [35] and use of Twitter
features (HashtagCount, MentionCount, LinkCount, maxFAVCount, maxRTCount). Moreover we algorithmically as-

4

In September 2015 (shortly after our study ended) the profile summary view of users was replaced with a hover effect
showing user details.

5
2 of the Tweets were deleted and it is impossible to derive
many of the features detailed below

360

sessed a Tweet’s sentiment6 (sentiment.score) and readability7 (readability.score), as well as its type as established by
human coders (Cohens Kappa: 0.48). The five content categories were slightly adapted from [11]: Conversational, Status Message, News Providing, Broadcasting, Unclassifiable
& Spam.
Sender-related features: As senders were shown to
play an important role in re-finding, we investigate a range
of features describing a Tweet’s sender and the relationship
between the participant and the sender. This group encompasses a sender’s general account information (SenderTweetsPosted, SenderFollowerCount etc.) and several heuristics
derived from the literature (TweetsRT ) to determine whether
the sender posts primarily about themselves (“meformers”)
or about more broader topics (“informers”) [34]. The usersender-relation was captured by how many of a sender’s
Tweets were received, clicked or specially interacted with by
the participant (TweetsPerSender, TweetsClickedPerSender,
TweetsSIPerSender etc.).
Session features characterise a user’s behaviour during the session in which a Tweet was clicked for the first
time. These include high-level session characteristics such
as (Duration, EventsTotal ), events per event categories (e.g.
TimelineEvents, UserProfileEvents), features with respect
to Tweets (TweetsHover, TweetsClick, TweetsBuffer ) information about Tweets on global level (RTCount, FAVCount)
as well as information on a Tweet’s age and click-position
(TweetAge,TweetPosition). Moreover a wide range of features related to mouse movement (ScrollSummary, DownScrollTotal, UpScrollTotal, MouseMoveCount etc.) are part
of this feature group. Finally, again with respect to the importance of senders, we integrate information regarding how
many profiles are visited during the session (ProfileVisits,
TotalProfileTime).
User features describe a participant’s overall Twitter behaviour as recorded by the extension e.g. number of sessions
in total, number of sessions per day (SessionCount, SessionsPerUserPerDay etc.) and account information (UserTweetsPosted, UserFollowerCount etc.).
Some of the described features cost more to obtain than
others. For example, Tweet features are freely available,
given a reference to the clicked Tweet. Session-features can
be recorded during regular Twitter use and not stored, if
no Tweet was clicked. Finally, long term information about
a user’s overall behaviour (user feature group) and her relation to other senders (user-sender-relation feature group)
complete the picture, but are expensive in that they involve
monitoring user behaviour over time and storing this in some
way.

6.3

Name

Description

TweetAge
TweetPosition
TweetVistime
SpecialInteraction
FAVCount
RTCount
MentionCount
LinkCount
HashtagCount
maxFAVCount
maxRTCount
CharCount
WordCount
avgWordLength
POSTags
POC
sentiment.score
readability.score
content.cat

Tweet Features
Age of Tweet at time of click
Position in stream at time of click
Period of visibility till time of click
Special interaction if any
Number of FAVs at time of click
Number of RTs at time of click
Number of @-mentions in a Tweet
Number of links in a Tweet
Number of hashtags in a Tweet
Overall maximum number of FAV
Overal maximum number of RT
Number of characters in a Tweet
Number of words in a Tweet
Average word length
21 part of speech features e.g. noun count
If Tweet was part of a conversation
Positive or negative sentiment of a Tweet
Flesch-Reading-Ease-Score
Tweet Category by human coder approach
User-Sender-Relation Features

TweetsPerSender
TweetsClickedPerSender†
TweetsSIPerSender†
SpecialInteractionNorm
FracTweetsMentions
FracTweetsHashtags
FracTweetsLinks
TweetsRT†
SenderTweetsPosted
SenderFollowerCount
SenderFollowingCount
SenderFAVCount
SenderCreated
SenderListedCount
UserClass

Number of Tweets received by user from sender x
Clicked Tweets of received Tweets from sender x
Tweets specially interacted with of Tweets from sender x
Normalization of special interaction
Fraction of Tweets with mentions from sender x
Fraction of Tweets with hashtags from sender x
Fraction of Tweets with links from sender x
Number and Fraction of Tweets that are RTs by sender x
Number of Tweets posted by sender x
Number of followers of sender x
Number sender x is following
Number of FAV’d Tweets by sender x
Time since registration
Number of lists sender x is listed
Meformer or Informer
Session Features

EventsTotal
Duration
BusynessIndex
TimelineEvents†
NotificationsEvents†
UserProfileEvent†
OwnProfileEvent†
FFMRelationsEvents†
SearchEvents†
FavouritesEvents†
SingleTweetEvents†
TweetingEvents†
DirectmessageEvents†
ListEvents†
OtherEvents†
TweetsSeen
MUR
RTCountSession*
FAVCountSession*
TweetPosition*
TweetAge*
TweetVistime*
TweetsBuffer†
TweetsClick†
TweetsHover†
ScrollSummary
DownScrollTotal
UpScrollTotal
ScrollIndex
MouseMoveCount
MouseDistance*
AvgMouseActivityIndex
ProfileVisits
TotalProfileTime
DistinctProfilesVisited
PUR

Number of events per session
Session duration in seconds
Number of events per duration
Number of events per context Timeline
Number of events per context Notifications
Number of events on user profiles
Number of events on own profile
Number of events for Following-Follower-Mention
Number of events per context search/number of search events
Number of events per context favourites list
Number of events per single Tweet view
Number of Tweets posted per session
Number of direct message interactions
Number of events on lists
Number of events on other sub-pages (e.g. Twitter API site)
Number of Tweets seen by user in session
Message uncertainty ratio (Tweets clicked/distinct Tweets clicked)
Average and maximum number of RTs observed over all Tweets seen
Average and maximum number of FAVs observed over all Tweets seen
Average and maximum position observed over all Tweets seen
Average and maximum age of Tweet observed over all Tweets seen
Average and maximum Tweet visibility till click
Number of Tweets added to stream while scrolling
Number of Tweets clicked
Number of Tweets hovered
Number of continuous scrolling activities
Down scroll distance in px
Up scroll distance in px
Total pixels scrolled/scroll summary events
Number of distinct mouse movements
Average and maximum distance covered by cursor in px
Site area (square px) covered by number of mouse movements
Number of user profile sites visited
Number of time spent on user profiles
Number of distinct user profiles visited
Person uncertainty ratio

MeanSessionDuration
SessionCount
AvgEventPerSession
SessionsPerUserPerDay
UserTweetsPosted
UserFollowerCount
UserFollowingCount
UserFAVCount
UserCreated
UserMediaSent

Average session duration for user
Number of sessions for user
Average events per session per user
Number of sessions per user per day
Number of Tweets posted by user
Number of followers a users has
Number of accounts a user is following
Number of FAV’d Tweets for user
Time since registration
Number of Tweets with media posted by user

User Features

Prediction Results

Table 5 shows the results of the prediction experiments.
The performance of all models is generally very good with
only small gains in F1 and accuracy over the baseline model
based only on (cheap to obtain) Tweet-features. The best
model is a complicated model consisting of 115 features from
three feature groups (Tweet + User-Sender-Relation + Session) and in practice would require long term observation.
To understand which features contribute most to model
accuracy and whether it is possible to reduce the feature

Table 4: Features used in the prediction task classified by feature group. Features tagged with † have
absolute and relative values. Features tagged with
* have average and max values.

6

8
We used the rfcv function from the R package randomForest
(https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/randomForest/)

7

space, we applied a cross validation function8 for feature selection, which assesses prediction performance of different
models by reducing the number of predictors in a stepwise

https://github.com/trinker/sentimentr
https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/koRpus/

361

Figure 6: Accuracy vs #predictors. 3 top features
obtain a similar performance to 80 or more.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Feature Groups
Tweet + User-Sender-Relation + Session
Top 3 features identified
Tweet + Session
Session
User
User-Sender-Relation
Tweet

F1-Score
0.80
0.79
0.79
0.76
0.75
0.75
0.74

Accuracy
0.79
0.80
0.78
0.76
0.75
0.74
0.72

AUC
0.88
0.86
0.87
0.85
0.82
0.82
0.78

# of Features
115
3
97
58
10
18
39

Figure 7: Top 25 features according to their mean
decrease in accuracy of the model using only Tweet
and session features. Each feature is colour-coded
to show which feature group it belongs to.

Table 5: Prediction performance for models with
different feature groups sorted by F1.

(i) Using a conservative proxy and missing cross-device
interactions we can be certain we are under-estimating the
frequency of re-finding, yet our results still indicate it is
prevalent and the personal life-cycle of Tweets is longer than
one might expect. Moreover, the data reveal that many older
Tweets were interacted with, showing that Tweets can still
be of value even after years have passed.
(ii) Although participants were able to predict some shortterm re-finding and bookmark these Tweets, hardly any of
the longer-term re-accesses were RT’d or FAV’d. This suggests that it is only later - induced by a then current information need - that the user becomes aware of the Tweet’s value
(post-valued recall). This phenomenon has been observed
in other PIM contexts [30, 49]. Even when participants did
correctly predict a Tweet’s future utility and bookmark it,
they tended not to use the bookmark to re-access. Forgetting about bookmarks due to an “out of sight, out of mind”
problem has also been reported in the PIM literature [26].
(iii) Search is not used as IR-researchers might hope.
Rather than searching for content directly (teleporting), participants first narrowed the space by searching for a person,
then scrolled to re-access. This was one of two orienteering strategies revealed and is most similar to the behaviour
seen in email search [14]. The second orienteering strategy
was link-based and reminiscent of the spatial navigation often preferred when re-finding computer files [1]. The lack of
teleporting strategies supports Teevan and colleagues’ decision not to classify repeated queries as re-finding behaviour.
(iv) We showed that future re-accesses can be predicted
with reasonable accuracy. Different kinds of features are
helpful, including long-term behavioural clues, which are
costly to attain. Good performance can be attained, however, using only predictors derived from Tweet content and
meta-data.
(v) Many of our analyses underline the importance of people in re-finding on Twitter: Re-finding sessions have more
user profile requests, re-finding Tweets via the sender’s profile page is the most common strategy for Tweets older than
a day and some of the most powerful predictive features for

manner. Figure 6 shows that with the three features contributing most to model accuracy a random forest model can
achieve a similar result as it would with 80 features or more.
These features are: SessionCount, SessionsPerUserPerDay
and TweetsClickedPerSender. All three are related to longterm behaviour and are costly to acquire. These features
underline, however, that frequent Twitter users do seem to
use Twitter as an information silo.
As we want models that work well for all users and don’t
base predictions largely on detecting active users, we also
tested variants which only utilise easily obtainable features
and do not model long-term user behaviour at all. Removing such behavioural features from the process still results
in a model with many features (97), but achieves a high
performance overall (Tweet + Session F1: 0,79, Acc: 0,78).
Figure 7 shows the importance of the top 25 features in
the Tweet + Session model as determined by the decrease
in accuracy if the feature is dropped. The plot shows a
dominance of variables from session group. However, two
features from the Tweet-feature group (if a Tweet was part
of a conversation (POC ) and/or specially interacted with)
are both good predictors for future clicks.

7.

SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION

When summarising our findings it is important to concede that we only had access to a small sample of Twitter
users and moreover only to interactions with the Twitter
website via Chrome. A large proportion of Twitter usage
is mobile/app-based9 and these interactions were missing in
our analyses. Nevertheless, in a way this makes our findings
even more striking:
9
According to Twitter 80% of active users access via a mobile device (https://about.twitter.com/company).

362

future re-access describe the relationship between the participant and the sender. Predictive models may offer utility
in several ways as we outline below.

8.

is pervasive. That is, contrary to Jack Dorsey’s comments,
people do “go back in time” and Tweets do sometimes prove
useful for longer than they are typically visible in the service. We have investigated re-finding strategies applied and
in doing so highlighted limitations of bookmarking strategies, both in terms of the accuracy in choosing which Tweets
to bookmark and re-using them when they exist. A later
step showed that automatic algorithms might be more effective at predicting future utility. Based on our findings
we made a number of design suggestions. In future work
we hope to implement and evaluate some of the features we
suggested. Nevertheless a deeper understanding of specific
aspects would also be useful. For example we know from
our analyses that people are important, but we don’t know
which people are important nor why. Future studies might
want to investigate what makes a person salient. Our next
step, however, will be to think about how to perform algorithmic experiments similar to those described in [8] as
mentioned above.

DESIGN IMPLICATIONS

We have shown that some Tweets can offer relevance for
longer than the period in which they are visible on the user’s
timeline. Although Twitter is already taking steps to avoid
the decaying visibility of Tweets by giving a recap of top
Tweets via the “While you were away...” feature10 , the platform could do more to further help users return to relevant,
older Tweets. We propose design implications for the two
orienteering strategies observed in our study, but first make
suggestions with respect to teleporting behaviour, which was
not observed but is known from re-finding studies in other
domains.
Support for teleporting: Although teleporting would
be a more direct strategy to re-access Tweets, it is perhaps
unsurprising that it wasn’t used. Twitter provides no obvious means to apply search queries only to Tweets, which
have appeared in the user’s own timeline. The one exception being CTRL+F in the browser over the currently
loaded Tweets. Twitter search queries can be restricted to
return only Tweets posted by a specified user with the @syntax, but we did not observe this in our data. It could be
that users are unaware of the function. The auto-complete
function also biases behaviour by immediately suggesting a
user-profile page. Based on what we have learned, we believe users would benefit from making the @-operator more
prominent and allowing additional query terms to make the
feature more usable for immediate re-finding.
There is also scope for improving the Twitter search algorithm directly to support re-finding. The features identified
as effective in the prediction task, may also offer utility in
a “learning to rank” approach to search. Similar to recent
approaches for email search a decay function combined with
behavioural features might lead to enhanced performance
[8]. Our data could be used to run experiments similar to
those in [8].
Support for orienteering: Support for re-finding via
orienteering could be implemented via various different SUI
features that support history mechanisms and help users
return to previously viewed Tweets. One helpful change
might be to subtly alter the colour of Tweets predicted to
have future utility. This would make them easier to identify
during the scrolling behaviour we identified as being typical of re-finding sessions. This change could be applied on
home timelines and on the profile pages of other users. Another approach would be to allow such Tweets to re-appear
amongst new Tweets. This idea has been shown to be effective for web-page re-finding [43] and Facebook has started to
do something similar with “memories”, but several user studies would be required to determine how many older Tweets
to show, how to show them etc., as well as determine user
tolerance for such an approach.

9.

10.

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

Analysing log data has proven very fruitful for IR research
in recent years. We have used this technique to learn about
information re-access and re-finding on Twitter. We have
shed light on several aspects, demonstrating that re-finding
10

REFERENCES

[1] D. Barreau and B. A. Nardi, Finding and reminding:
File organization from the desktop, SIGCHI Bull. 27
(1995), no. 3, 39–43.
[2] F. Benevenuto, T. Rodrigues, M. Cha, and
V. Almeida, Characterizing user behavior in online
social networks, Proc. IMC, ACM, 2009, pp. 49–62.
[3] d. boyd, S. Golder, and G. Lotan, Tweet, tweet,
retweet: Conversational aspects of retweeting on
twitter, Proc. HICSS, IEEE, 2010, pp. 1–10.
[4] H. Bruce, Personal, anticipated information need,
Information Research 10(3) (2005), no. 232.
[5] H. Bruce, W. Jones, and S. Dumais, Information
behaviour that keeps found things found, Information
Research 10 (2004), no. 1.
[6] R. Buettner and K. Buettner, A systematic literature
review of twitter research from a socio-political
revolution perspective, Proc. HICSS, IEEE, 2016.
[7] R. Capra and M. Perez-Quinones, Using web search
engines to find and refind information, Computer 38
(2005), no. 10, 36–42.
[8] D. Carmel, G. Halawi, L. Lewin-Eytan, Y. Maarek,
and A. Raviv, Rank by time or by relevance?:
Revisiting email search, Proc. CIKM, 2015,
pp. 283–292.
[9] A. Civan, W. Jones, P. Klasnja, and H. Bruce, Better
to organize personal information by folders or by
tags?: The devil is in the details, Proc. ASIST 45
(2008), no. 1, 1–13.
[10] S. Counts and K. Fisher, Taking it all in? visual
attention in microblog consumption., Proc. ICWSM,
The AAAI Press, 2011.
[11] S. Dann, Twitter content classification, First Monday
15 (2010), no. 12.
[12] S. Dumais, E. Cutrell, JJ Cadiz, G. Jancke, R. Sarin,
and D. C. Robbins, Stuff i’ve seen: A system for
personal information retrieval and re-use, Proc.
SIGIR, 2003, pp. 72–79.
[13] S. Dumais, R. Jeffries, D. M. Russell, D. Tang, and
J. Teevan, Understanding user behavior through log
data and analysis, Ways of Knowing in HCI, 2014,
pp. 349–372.

https://blog.twitter.com/2015/while-you-were-away-0

363

[14] D. Elsweiler, M. Baillie, and I. Ruthven, What makes
re-finding information difficult? a study of email
re-finding, Proc. ECIR, 2011, pp. 568–579.
[15] D. Elsweiler and M. Harvey, Engaging and
maintaining a sense of being informed: Understanding
the tasks motivating twitter search, JASIST (2014).
[16] D. Elsweiler, M. Harvey, and M. Hacker,
Understanding re-finding behavior in naturalistic email
interaction logs, Proc. SIGIR, 2011, pp. 35–44.
[17] M. Fernández-Delgado, E. Cernadas, S. Barro, and
D. Amorim, Do we need hundreds of classifiers to
solve real world classification problems?, J. Mach.
Learn. Res. 15 (2014), no. 1.
[18] G. Gorrell and K. Bontcheva, Classifying twitter
favorites: Like, bookmark, or thanks?, JASIST (2015).
[19] M. Harvey and D. Elsweiler, Exploring query patterns
in email search, Proc. ECIR, 2012, pp. 25–36.
[20] M. Hertzum, People as carriers of experience and
sources of commitment: Information seeking in a
software design project, New Rev. Inf. Behav. Res. 1
(2000), no. January, 135–149.
[21] N. Hodas and K Lerman, How visibility and divided
attention constrain social contagion,
SocialCom-PASSAT’12, 2012, pp. 249–257.
[22] C. Honeycutt and S. C. Herring, Beyond
microblogging: Conversation and collaboration via
twitter, Proc. HICSS, 2009, pp. 1–10.
[23] L. Hong, O. Dan, and B. D. Davison, Predicting
popular messages in twitter, Proc. WWW, ACM,
2011, pp. 57–58.
[24] C.J. Hutto, S. Yardi, and E. Gilbert, A longitudinal
study of follow predictors on twitter, Proc. SIGCHI,
2013, pp. 821–830.
[25] A. Java, X. Song, T. Finin, and B. Tseng, Why we
twitter: Understanding microblogging usage and
communities, Proc. WebKDD/SNA-KDD, 2007,
pp. 56–65.
[26] W. Jones, A. J. Phuwanartnurak, R. Gill, and
H. Bruce, Don’t take my folders away!: Organizing
personal information to get ghings done, SIGCHI,
2005, pp. 1505–1508.
[27] W. Jones and J. Teevan (eds.), Personal information
management, University of Washington Press, 2007.
[28] A. Komlodi, D. Soergel, and G. Marchionini, Search
histories for user support in user interfaces, JASIST
57 (2006), no. 6, 803–807.
[29] H. Kwak, C. Lee, H. Park, and S. Moon, What is
twitter, a social network or a news media?, Proc.
WWW ’10, ACM, 2010, pp. 591–600.
[30] M. Lansdale, The psychology of personal information
management, App. Ergonomics 19 (1988), no. 1,
55–66.
[31] F. Meier and D. Elsweiler, Tweets i’ve seen: Analysing
factors influencing re-finding frustration on twitter,
Proc. IIiX, 2014, pp. 287–290.
[32] F. Meier, D. Elsweiler, and M. L. Wilson, More than
liking and bookmarking? towards understanding twitter
favouriting behaviour, Proc. ICWSM, The AAAI
Press, 2014.
[33] M. R. Morris, J. Teevan, and K. Panovich, What Do
People Ask Their Social Networks, and Why? A

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]
[39]

[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]

[47]

[48]

[49]

[50]

364

Survey Study of Status Message Q&A Behavior, Proc.
CHI, 2010, pp. 1739–1748.
M. Naaman, J. Boase, and C-H. Lai, Is it really about
me? message content in social awareness streams,
Proc. CSCW, 2010, pp. 189–192.
O. Owoputi, B. O’Connor, C. Dyer, K. Gimpel,
N. Schneider, and N. A. Smith, Improved
part-of-speech tagging for online conversational text
with word clusters, Proc. NAACL-HLT, 2013,
pp. 380–390.
S. Petrovic, M. Osborne, and V. Lavrenko, RT to
Win! Predicting Message Propagation in Twitter,
Proc. ICWSM, 2011.
P. Ravasio, S. G. Schär, and H. Krueger, In pursuit of
desktop evolution: User problems and practices with
modern desktop systems, ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum.
Interact. 11 (2004), no. 2, 156–180.
R. Rogers, Debanalizing twitter: The transformation
of an object of study, Proc. WebSci, 2013, pp. 356–365.
S. Sadeghi, R. Blanco, P. Mika, M. Sanderson,
F. Scholer, and D. Vallet, Predicting re-finding activity
and difficulty, Proc. ECIR, 2015, pp. 715–727.
F. Schneider, A. Feldmann, B. Krishnamurthy, and
W. Willinger, Understanding online social network
usage from a network perspective, Proc. IMC, 2009,
pp. 35–48.
B. Suh, L. Hong, P. Pirolli, and Ed H. Chi, Want to be
retweeted? large scale analytics on factors impacting
retweet in twitter network, Proc. SOCIALCOM, 2010,
pp. 177–184.
L. Tauscher and S. Greenberg, Revisitation patterns in
world wide web navigation, Proc. CHI, ACM, 1997,
pp. 399–406.
J. Teevan, The re:search engine: Simultaneous support
for finding and re-finding, Proc UIST, ACM, 2007,
pp. 23–32.
J. Teevan, E. Adar, R. Jones, and M. A. S. Potts,
Information re-retrieval: Repeat queries in yahoo’s
logs, Proc. SIGIR, 2007, pp. 151–158.
J. Teevan, C. Alvarado, M. S. Ackerman, and D. R.
Karger, The perfect search engine is not enough: A
study of orienteering behavior in directed search, Proc.
CHI, ACM, 2004, pp. 415–422.
J. Teevan, E. Cutrell, D. Fisher, S. M. Drucker,
G. Ramos, P. André, and C. Hu, Visual snippets:
Summarizing web pages for search and revisitation,
Proc. CHI, 2009, pp. 2023–2032.
J. Teevan, D. Ramage, and M. R. Morris,
#twittersearch: A comparison of microblog search and
web search, Proc. WSDM, 2011, pp. 35–44.
S. K. Tyler and J. Teevan, Large scale query log
analysis of re-finding, Proc. WSDM, 2010,
pp. 191–200.
J. Wen, Post-valued recall web pages: User
disorientation hits the big time, IT & Society 1 (2003),
184–194.
S. Whittaker and C. Sidner, Email overload:
Exploring personal information management of email,
Proc. CHI, ACM, 1996, pp. 276–283.

