Building a Self-Learning Search Engine:
From Research to Business
Manos Tsagkias
manos@904labs.com

Wouter Weerkamp
wouter@904labs.com

904Labs, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

904Labs, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

ABSTRACT

writing one paper. What is the core problem you are trying to solve
and focus on that particular problem. Ignore the rest, as interesting
as it might be, you might add it in a later paper.

904Labs B.V. was founded in 2014 by Wouter Weerkamp, Manos
Tsagkias, and Maarten de Rijke to commercialize state-of-the-art
search engine technology. 904Labs’ strategic product is a selflearning search engine for online retailers, which uses some of the
most recent scientific developments in machine learning and search
engine evaluation. 904Labs has raised about 200K in funding and
has signed pilots with large international and national companies.
Since its start, 904Labs has grown with two developers and two experienced business people. In this presentation we tell how to go
from research to business and the challenges it brings along?

1.

1.2

FROM RESEARCH TO BUSINESS

In our talk we take you on a journey that starts at a university
and ends owning a search technology company that is still in its
early stages. We describe this journey in several steps, including
the lessons learned after each step. We explain the current state of
the company and the future plans and opportunities, and conclude
by listing some of the major challenges.

1.1

Choosing a path

Working under the assumption that most businesses were by now
at a reasonable level when it comes to implementing search solutions (e.g., use Elasticsearch or Solr), we figured that the world was
ready to meet self-learning search. Self-learning search is a fancy
name for online learning to rank, which is learning to rank tightly
coupled with interleaving, which allows real-time learning and experimenting with new search algorithms.
After initial talks with a few potential clients (i.e., large e-commerce
sites), it became clear that these organizations are not looking to
replace their current systems with yet another solutions. Also, the
search engines running at their sites are part of very complex product and customer management systems, in which we are not interested. On the other hand, these large sites could potentially benefit
a lot from self-learning search, given the amount of traffic and the
revenue deriving from search. Taking everything into consideration, we decided to offer self-learning search as-a-service, a middleware layer sitting between the e-commerce site and the client’s
existing search infrastructure. It allows for quick easy integration.
Many months later, after talks with yet other potential clients,
we found out that SaaS solutions have their own problems (e.g.,
latency, reliability), keeping large organizations from buying. Implementing self-learning search as plugins for major search solutions (Elasticsearch, Solr) is now another viable direction we are
exploring.

Setting off

The journey of 904Labs starts at the University of Amsterdam.
Witnessing a growing number of organizations knocking on the
university’s door to ask for help with their “scientifically interesting” problems, which turned out to be not of interest to the university, we saw an opportunity for a business entity to jump in and
help these organizations solve their problems. 904Labs was born,
and we thought of it much like an extension of the research group
from which it originates. As one can imagine, the problems organizations face are as diverse as the research done within the research
group, ranging from entity extraction and linking, via text summarization, to more regular search issues. Offering all these solutions
is infeasible as a startup for three reasons: (1) there is limited manpower, you cannot do everything; (2) it is unclear to the outside
world what the company actually offers; and (3) there is no scalable
business model in developing custom-made software solutions.

Lessons learned: Test assumptions. You cannot do this enough
(and we actually did not do it enough). Which problems are your
clients facing? What do they want? How do they want it? Ask,
ask, ask. Do not sell, but learn. It is like testing the research waters
with a small workshop paper before working on the full SIGIR submission. If no one cares about the workshop paper, do not bother
writing the full paper.

Lessons learned: Focus. Do not try to solve everything, but pick
one problem and design your solution around it. Think of it as

1.3

En route

The direction has been determined, now how to actually go there?
Being confident researchers, we thought implementing well-known
methods into a working system should be a matter of weeks. Selling it would, of course, be easy, because who would not want to
have such a cool system? So we would be making money within a
few months, meaning that until then we could do without funding.
Wrong. Building a product takes time. A lot of it. Selling takes
at least an equal amount of time, and probably more when you are
not a natural-born salesperson. This means that you will not see
any money coming in from product sales any time soon. Unless

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).

SIGIR ’16 July 17-21, 2016, Pisa, Italy
c 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2926728

523

Lessons learned: Take care of the team. Make sure you have (experienced) people at the important positions in the team; you cannot do everything yourself. Sales and marketing is a very different
beast. Think of writing a paper, scrapping all technical sections,
and leaving only the main result and original problem (“Web search
is hard. We improve MAP by 10%”). No one cares how you do it.

you get more people on board, for which you need . . . money. With
a growing need for revenue, it becomes hard to say no to consultancy projects, which take up much of your time and distract from
developing your own product. We finally figured out that money
is a necessity and applied for various grants, receiving 175K euro.
The money gave us the opportunity to hire developers, speed up
product development, and focus on business development instead
of consultancy jobs.

1.5

Lessons learned: Take care of the financials. And stay on track.
Try to find grants (e.g., from your university) or investors so that
you do not get sidetracked by consultancy jobs. It is like working on your final technical thesis chapter, while you have already
started as a postdoc somewhere else. You get paid, but cannot do
the work you should be doing.

1.4

What the future may bring

We have a first version of our product, self-learning search asa-service. We have pilot agreements with several companies, like
Elsevier, WizeNoze, and Autostyle. We have a team that includes
developers, business people, and ourselves. And we have a buffer
of money. Now we need sales. Hardcore sales. We are in the
money-making business, so let us try that. After money comes in,
we can focus on improving the product by thinking about faceted
search and online learning to rank, personalized online learning to
rank, and delayed feedback.

Getting lost and finding the way

Being en route does not mean you cannot change directions anymore. Or that you will not get lost. From a business perspective,
finding the right client segment is a challenge, and one that continually changes. Your marketing depends on your client segment, your
website depends on the marketing strategy, grants have milestones
that should fit product development, which in itself is dependent on
the problems faced by your potential clients. And how do you convince clients to buy your product? We might have PhDs in search
technology, but why would potential clients care? They do not. Being convinced of your product is one thing, but selling it is another.
After trying to get pilots and clients, with mixed success, and doing
so without a clear strategy, we decided that it was time to acknowledge our weaknesses. We are not experienced business men and
you do need those to find your way. We have reached out to potential investors who, instead of investing money, have jumped on
board in hands on positions related to business development, marketing, and sales. Having experienced people taking care of this
side of running a company helps immensely and allows us to focus
on the things we are good at.

1.6

Conclusion

Are you thinking of entering the startup arena with a brilliant
idea that has proven itself in research? Do it! It is a fun ride. But
do keep in mind that business is not research. People do not care
about the technical and theoretical details, they want to know which
problems it solves and what it brings them. So, (1) talk to potential
clients, find out what their problems are; (2) Focus on one problem
and create a solution for it; (3) Get funding to hire people and avoid
distractions, and (4) take care of the business side of things.

524

