Ranking Financial Tweets
Diego Ceccarelli

Francesco Nidito

Bloomberg LP

Bloomberg LP

Bloomberg LP

dceccarelli4@bloomberg.net fnidito@bloomberg.net

ABSTRACT

INTRODUCTION

Financial market participants constantly need new information when decision making, with news being an important
signal. Financially-relevant news is traditionally divided
into a number of broad topics such as securities (equities,
foreign exchange, fixed income, commodities, derivatives),
mergers and acquisitions, regulation and compliance. News
can concern broad macro-level events (for example, a central
bank raising interest rates or the UK leaving the EU) as well
as staples of traditional news, such as natural disasters.
Relatively recently Twitter has gained importance within
Finance. In part this is due to the US Securities and Exchange Commission allowing companies to use Social Media to communicate company announcements,1 along with
a growing awareness that it is becoming a source of breaking
news [4]. Rumour and speculation on Twitter can be informative as this can reflect investor mood and outlook. Given
the massive volume of tweets published each day (upwards of
500 Million posts), how can we effectively rank Financially
relevant tweets so that Markets can react to them?

2.

mosborne29@bloomberg.net

tweets that are relevant for Financial professionals. Users
can perform simple topic search (e.g., “find me tweets about
Oil”) and get a mix of tweets and news articles, as well as
more traditional search. In both scenarios ranked lists of results are produced. Bloomberg has signed a long-term data
agreement with Twitter and ingests more than one million
newswire articles per day.2 3
Tweets typically are ingested as a stream and ranking
needs to take into account factors such as novelty and relevance. Here we focus on relevance and how it relates to
popularity within Twitter. Ranking microblog posts is a
well studied problem [2, 5], with a dedicated TREC track
that started in 2011 [3]. Usually in social media popularity
is seen as being correlated with relevance and many learning
to rank retrieval models are trained using, inter alia, social
signals such as the number of followers or the number of
retweets [1]. Does author popularity (when measured using
the number of followers) or community popularity (when
measured using the number of times a given post was reported or retweeted) have any bearing on ranking within a
Financial setting?

Recently Twitter has complemented traditional newswire as
a source of valuable Financial information. Although there
is a rich body of published research dealing with the task of
ranking tweets, there has been little published research dealing with ranking tweets within a Financial context. Here we
consider whether popularity factors within Twitter can be
used as a signal for popularity within the domain of financial
experts. Our results suggest that what interests Finance is
not the same as what interests the users of Twitter.

1.

Miles Osborne

3.

SOCIAL AND FINANCIAL IMPORTANCE

We carried-out a small scale experiment in order to explore our question: for each tweet that we made available to
Bloomberg users for 25 days in 2016 we recorded the number of recorded user views (a user view is a client reading
a post in Bloomberg) together with post statistics such the
number of author followers and the number of times a post
was retweeted.4 We collected the top 100 tweets ranked by
the number of views. Our assumption here is that the number of user views made by Financial professionals is a good
proxy of relevance within Finance as a whole.
For each of these tweets we considered the extent to which
retweeting rates and author followers are correlated with the
number of views. We computed the correlation coefficient
ρ for these variables. We found a good correlation between
retweets and followers (ρ = .76, statistically significant) but
a very low correlation between views and retweets, and views
and followers (resp. ρ = .12, ρ = .14). This suggests that
the number of retweets and followers are not direct proxies
for relevance in the financial setting.
Given that news covers a broad range of topics, we considered whether perhaps certain types of news better corre-

RANKING TWEETS

The Bloomberg Terminal allows a user to browse/search
1
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2013-0402/sec-approves-social-media-use-for-companies-materialdisclosure

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work
for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that
copies are to
notmake
made
or distributed
for of
profit
Permission
digital
or hard copies
part or
or commercial
all of this work for personal or
advantageuse
and
that copies
bear
noticethat
andcopies
the full
citation
the
classroom
is granted
without
feethis
provided
are not
madeon
or distributed
firstprofit
page.
Copyrightsadvantage
for third-party
ofnotice
this work
must
for
or commercial
and thatcomponents
copies bear this
and the
full citation
be the
honored.
ForCopyrights
all other for
uses,
contactcomponents
the Owner/Author.
on
first page.
third-party
of this work must be honored.
Copyright
held
by the
For
all other is
uses,
contact
theowner/author(s).
Owner/Author. Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’16,
July
17-21,
2016,
Pisa, Pisa,
Italy Italy
SIGIR '16,
July
17-21,
2016,
Copyright
2016 ACM 9978-1-4503-4069-4/16/0
ACM 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2926727
...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2926727

2

https://blog.twitter.com/2015/bloomberg-twitter-data
https://youtu.be/oMOV7DB4gnA?t=271
4
We recorded the number of retweets for each post after the
census period.
3

527

lated with external popularity. For example, news about a
major company might be popular both within Twitter and
also within the Financial community. We manually categorized the top tweets into five categories: news about a
company (40 tweets), governance (12 tweets), news about
pharma industry (14 tweets), merging and acquisitions (24
tweets) miscellanea (10 tweets). We computed the ρ for the
news categories obtaining ρ values similar to the previous:
for example on companies we measured ρ = .79 between
views and retweets, while ρ = .19 for views and retweets
and ρ = .18 for views and followers. This suggests that external popularity does not carry over to individual Financial
categories.

4.

4. A story about a major phishing attack, posted by a
major news company with more than 10 million followers (42).
We were surprised by the fact that Example 2 was not
considered relevant in our financial context. On closer inspection, there were other newswire stories about that company that we made available two minutes before –probably
at that point the Twitter story was no longer temporally
relevant for the users. This again suggests that novelty is a
major characteristic of relevant news: in this case the story
was on-topic for Finance, but the fact that a similar, nonTwitter story was published and surfaced two minutes prior
made the otherwise topical Twitter story no longer interesting.

EXAMPLES OF POPULAR TWEETS

We selected the mostly highly viewed tweets and analysed
why they were popular. Topics included (numbers after each
post indicate the number of times the corresponding tweet
was retweeted):

6.

1. An unauthorised comment on advertising spending declining (15).
2. Notification of a company defaulting (91).
3. News of an ongoing bribery scandal affecting a hedge
fund (4).
4. News about a biotech company having a potential buyer
(37).

7.

5. Speculation on the valuation of a company (1).
Three of these stories appeared in first place on Twitter and were posted on the Terminal minutes before news
about the same facts produced by more traditional news
sources. We also note that rumours are favoured. As expected, within Finance, core financial stories are highly viewed.
Twitter complements traditional news in that we see speculation (Example 5) as well as off-the-cuff reporting (Example
1). We see that important Financial tweets are not necessarily highly retweeted (Examples 5 and 3). None of these
stories used hashtags (though two used cashtags5 ). None
mentioned other Twitter users and only two posts had an
image in them. Not within these examples, we also observed
that the authors of highly viewed tweets need not always
have many Twitter followers. One story was written by an
account with less than one hundred followers.

5.

WHAT ABOUT UNPOPULAR TWEETS?

We also randomly sampled 50 tweets that received only
one view during the same period and analysed them in the
same way. We noticed that some tweets that were not relevant for the Financial professionals exhibit a large number
of retweets (> 100). In particular we found:
1. A story about a probable terrorist attack in Paris (410).
2. A rumour about a large acquisition of a company (190).
3. A story about governance, not in English (192).
5

COMMENTS

Ranking tweets for the Financial Community is different
to standard ranking for micro-blogs. Initial evidence suggests that novelty is important and that what counts as
being popular within Finance is not necessarily the same
as popularity within Twitter. Crucially, ‘novelty’ is with respect to the totality of all news and not just news as found in
Twitter. Successfully ranking tweets for Finance must also
take account of temporally relevant newswire stories. It does
not suffice to rank tweets in isolation. For Finance, speculation, capture of fleeting information and core financial topics are all important and complement more traditional news
content.

A cashtag is a hashtag-like symbol for a traded company.

528

REFERENCES

[1] Y. Duan, L. Jiang, T. Qin, M. Zhou, and H.-Y. Shum.
An empirical study on learning to rank of tweets. In
Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on
Computational Linguistics, pages 295–303. Association
for Computational Linguistics, 2010.
[2] R. Nagmoti, A. Teredesai, and M. De Cock. Ranking
approaches for microblog search. In Web Intelligence
and Intelligent Agent Technology (WI-IAT), 2010
IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on,
volume 1, pages 153–157. IEEE, 2010.
[3] I. Ounis, C. Macdonald, J. Lin, and I. Soboroff.
Overview of the trec-2011 microblog track. In
Proceeddings of the 20th Text REtrieval Conference
(TREC 2011), volume 32, 2011.
[4] S. Petrovic, M. Osborne, R. McCreadie, C. Macdonald,
I. Ounis, and L. Shrimpton. Can twitter replace
newswire for breaking news? In Seventh International
AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, 2013.
[5] I. Soboroff, D. McCullough, J. Lin, C. Macdonald,
I. Ounis, and R. McCreadie. Evaluating real-time
search over tweets. Proc. ICWSM, pages 943–961, 2012.

