The Data Stack in Information Retrieval
Omar Alonso
Microsoft

omalonso@microsoft.com
ABSTRACT

The focus on data analysis and exploration is causing developers
to include a number of tools and languages (e.g., MapReduce, R,
Spark, etc.) for managing the increasing variety and volume of
data. In software development, there is the notion of a full-stack
developer, that is, a person who can work on back-end and frontend with everything in the middle. LAMP (Linux, Apache,
MySQL, and PHP) has been one of the most popular development
stacks for many years. Search practitioners are now expected to
master a wide range of data problems at different levels where the
assumption of an individual database that contains everything and
a single language for data processing is unlikely. Is there a data
stack equivalent? If so, how does it look like and what are the
main characteristics? As a driving example and in the context of
IR, I propose to look at the following data stack:

I propose to look at information retrieval applications from the
perspective of the data stack infrastructure that is needed in
research prototypes and production systems.

Keywords

Data science, big data, small data, infrastructure, applications.

1. INTRODUCTION

Every day millions of users rely on web search engines and social
networks to search for information and learn about current events.
While the user interface of those services is intuitive and easy to
use, the amount of data being collected, mined, analyzed, and
indexed for presenting relevant information is quite large. At the
same time, large data sets are used internally by service providers
for measuring user satisfaction and testing improvements with
large scale experimentation. In this talk, I will present the notion
of the data stack, an alternative way of looking at information
retrieval applications.

1.
2.
3.

The database community is focused on data and systems for
storing, organizing, and querying all sorts of data [1]. The
information retrieval community promotes research and
development in the areas of search and information access and
has, traditionally, been focused on metrics and modeling and not
so much on data analysis and exploration as a core principle [2].
Given the massive adoption of different types of search services,
information retrieval is becoming a more data-driven and dataintensive area. Besides the large scale of the Web and social
networks that require systems to crawl and ingest such data, users
also leave enormous amounts of new data in the form of search
query logs, clicks, and generated content that are used to improve
relevance and for predictive modeling.

4.
5.

Ingestion and processing of raw data. Examples:
crawling, data cleaning, near-duplicate detection, etc.
Annotation for augmenting the ingested data. Examples:
named-entity detection, information extraction,
metadata generation, content classification, etc.
Indexing and ranking of high quality content. Examples:
efficient data structures, feature engineering, etc.
Behavioral data for capturing user activity. Examples:
search query logs, clicks, link sharing, etc.
Experimentation and analysis infrastructure for
evaluation and exploration. Examples: Sampling,
interleaving, A-B testing, crowdsourcing, etc.

The data stack presents new challenges and opportunities to
perform research and development at different levels with the goal
of improving current systems and user satisfaction.

2. REFERENCES

[1] Daniel Abadi et al. “The Beckman Report on Database
Research”, Comm. of the ACM, 59(2), pp. 92-99, 2016.

Almost a decade ago, Jim Gray proposed to start thinking in terms
data-intensive research and discovery, known as the Fourth
Paradigm, a new way of doing science that uses data as one of the
main pillars [3]. The goal is for scientists to turn to discovery
through data analysis making use of massive data sets. With the
data science role now taking a central part in the software
industry and the on-going cross-pollination with other disciplines,
data is currently perceived as the new oil.

[2] James Allan, W. Bruce Croft, Alistair Moffat, and Mark
Sanderson. “Frontiers, challenges, and opportunities for
information retrieval: Report from SWIRL 2012 the second
strategic workshop on information retrieval in Lorne”. SIGIR
Forum, 46(1):2-32, 2012.
[3] Tony Hey, Stewart Tansley, and Kristin Tolle (Eds.). The
Fourth Paradigm, Microsoft Research, 2009.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other
uses, contact the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
SIGIR '16, July 17-21, 2016, Pisa, Italy
ACM 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2926726

597

