A Cross-Platform Collection of Social Network Profiles
Maria Han Veiga

Carsten Eickhoff

Inst. of Computational Science
University of Zurich, Switzerland

Dept. of Computer Science
ETH Zurich, Switzerland

ecarsten@inf.ethz.ch

hmaria@physik.uzh.ch

ABSTRACT

personal thoughts and content. [8] finds that OSNs are
among the most frequently visited Web sites for a large population of users. In consequence, they can be used to study
human behaviour at a large scale. Furthermore, because
many OSNs are public by default and provide APIs to access their content, they have become good candidates for
data collection to be used to study problems such as user/
topic modelling, user identification or information leakage.
In this paper, we introduce a collection of 850 users and
their online footprint (part of their generated content and
user profiles) spread across three social networks: Twitter,
Instagram and Foursquare. It is our objective to provide a
dataset on which privacy-sensitive methods and the defense
against them can be tested. The construction of this dataset
was initially carried out during a research project studying
cross platform privacy loss arising from public information
sharing on social networks [4]. In Table 1, a comparison of
our dataset with other existing corpora is given.
Our data collection method relies on linking users across
three popular OSN platforms. Twitter is a microblogging
platform whose main content comes in tweets, posts limited
to 140 characters which can contain text, video or images,
links to external Web sites, references to other users and
hashtags (terms starting with the # symbol used to mark
keywords or topics in a tweet). Instagram is a photo sharing
platform. Its main content are photos or videos along with
optional textual descriptors. Foursquare is a location service
platform concentrating on the notion of check-ins.
The paper makes the following novel contributions (1) We
describe the methodology and release the code to construct
a user-centric cross-OSN dataset. (2) We release a dataset
of 850 profile triples across the aforementioned OSNs.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: in
Section 2, we present the methodology used to create the
collection. Section 3 presents key statistics and qualitative
aspects of the dataset. Section 4 discusses the task of crossplatform user identification as an example use case before
sketching a range of further conceivable use cases and tasks.

The proliferation of Internet-enabled devices and services
has led to a shifting balance between digital and analogue
aspects of our everyday lives. In the face of this development there is a growing demand for the study of privacy
hazards, the potential for unique user de-anonymization and
information leakage between the various social media profiles many of us maintain. To enable the structured study
of such adversarial effects, this paper presents a dedicated
dataset of cross-platform social network personas (i.e., the
same person has accounts on multiple platforms). The corpus comprises 850 users who generate predominantly English content. Each user object contains the online footprint
of the same person in three distinct social networks: Twitter, Instagram and Foursquare. In total, it encompasses over
2.5M tweets, 340k check-ins and 42k Instagram posts. We
describe the collection methodology, characteristics of the
dataset, and how to obtain it. Finally, we discuss a common
use case, cross-platform user identification.

CCS Concepts
•Information systems → Test collections;

Keywords
Collection; Data set; Online Social Networks

1.

INTRODUCTION

The field of computational social science and data-driven
research is growing in importance [9], and with this trend,
there is a need for common academic benchmarking collections to facilitate a robust and reproducible research environment. In practice, however, datasets are often obtained
via ad-hoc collection, or on the basis of proprietary data.
While originally Online Social Networks (OSNs) focused
on allowing users to communicate, connect with others and
share content, nowadays the term includes platforms which
are primarily user-centric, allowing members to broadcast

2.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.

METHOD

We use Twitter, Instagram and Foursquare mainly due
to the ease of crawling and publicly accessible APIs, but
also because the content generated by the users in these
distinct social networks is diverse and representative of a
comprehensive range of OSN use cases. In [11], the authors
find that on Twitter, the top types of content users share
are: personal information, random thoughts, opinions/complaints and facts (e.g. news). While on Instagram, the ma-

SIGIR ’16, July 17–21, 2016, Pisa, Italy.
c 2016 ACM. ISBN 0-12345-67-8/90/01. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2914666

665

Table 1: An overview of existing datasets containing cross-OSN user profiles.
Features
MNA [7]
MAH [12]
About.me [10]
Cross OSN
Twitter,
Twitter,
Flickr, Google+, Instagram, Instagram, Twitter
OSNs
Foursquare
BlogCatalog
Tumblr, Twitter, Youtube
Foursquare
# Users
500
2710
15,595
850
User IDs, posts,
User IDs,
User IDs,
User IDs,
Content type
friends graph
friends graph
post IDs
post IDs
Availability
Unknown
Unknown
Available
Available

jority of the posted pictures can be put in 1 of 8 categories,
with the leading categories being selfies and friends [5]. On
Foursquare, users share their location in terms of venues,
which carries not only information in the form of raw geographic coordinates, but often also the venue’s name and
function.
In order to obtain profiles from different OSNs belonging
to the same person, we first use the Twitter Search API to
search for specific post patterns (e.g., https://instagr.am/
p/*), in order to identify users who cross-post content from
other platforms on Twitter. A graphical depiction of the
collection process is shown in Figure 1.
The data was collected in January and February 2016.
While we were able to find over 5000 profile triples, only approximately 20% of these triples fulfill our criteria of actively
using the three selected OSNs, posting predominantly in English and sharing content publicly. After enforcing these requirements, our dataset contains a total of 850 distinct user
profiles.

2.1

from the respective OSN and we check whether the majority
of the posts come from the same user name. In our collection, the threshold is set to 30%. Suspected spammer triples
are flagged but, for completeness, remain in the dataset.
Data: Instagram or Foursquare timeline
Result: spammerFlag
initialization;
for posts do
count(author of post);
end
if counter.max/total posts < threshold then
spammerFlag=1;
else
spammerFlag=0;
end
Algorithm 2: Identity check

English predominance

3.

We focused on profiles with predominantly English content as the initial study for which the data was collected was
a natural language processing task that would have suffered
from excessive amounts of cross-language content.
In order to guarantee that the majority of the content is
posted in English, we use the method described in Algorithm 1. We set the ratio to be 0.1 and K = 100 for our
collection. The purpose is not to exclude users that occasionally post in a non-English language, but to make sure
the data set does not contain too many strictly non Englishspeaking users.
Data: twitter timeline
Result: true or false
initialization;
for K posts do
count(english posts);
end
if count.total/K < ratio then
disregard user;
else
crawl timeline;
end

3.1

Properties

For each user we store Twitter, Instagram and Foursquare
IDs along with the tweet and post IDs of all shared content. The Foursquare data is represented as a list of tuples
(venue id, tweet id), where tweet id is the tweet announcing
the check-in. An example of the collected user data is shown
in Table 2. For copyright reasons, we do not distribute the
content but instead provide the scripts to crawl the data [1].
Using these scripts, the following can be retrieved:

Algorithm 1: English check

2.2

DATASET

Our 850 authentic English-speaking users produced approximately 2.5M tweets, 340k check-ins and 42k Instagram
posts1 . Four users were flagged as spammers under the rule
described in Section 2.2.
Figure 2 shows the distribution of tweets per user. Figures
3 and 4 show the distribution of number of check-ins and
Instagram posts per user, respectively.
The Twitter API restricts access to at most 3200 tweets
per profile (including re-tweets) [13]. Because we exclude
direct re-tweets from our data set, the majority of the Twitter profiles we collect contain between 3000 and 3200 tweets.
For each Instagram profile, we recover the most recent posts
through the Instagram API and complement them with existing content which has been posted on Twitter. For each
Foursquare profile, we recover those check-ins that were crossposted on the retrieved Twitter timeline.
In this dataset, we observe check-ins from 111 countries,
spawning 669 venue types. The most visited venue types are
shown in Figure 5.

Spam detection

To increase the confidence that users are authentic personal accounts instead of spammers that merely redistribute
content from other users, we have a simple heuristic described in Algorithm 2. We take the timeline of the user

1

666

http://cake.da.inf.ethz.ch/OSN-sigir2016/

Figure 1: Dataset collection. We use Twitter’s search API to find posts with the pattern of a Foursquare
check-in or an Instagram post. If a profile contains both, we crawl the Foursquare check-ins and Instagram
profile through their respective APIs.

Figure 2: Histogram of tweets per user

Figure 4: Histogram of Instagram posts per user

Figure 3: Histogram of Foursquare posts per user

Figure 5: Top 10 visited venue types

667

4.3

Table 2: Example of provided and retrievable data.
Feature Description
Retrieves
Twitter
ID
Integer
Twitter profile
Timeline List of tweet IDs
Tweet object
Instagram
ID
Integer
Instagram profile
Timeline List of post shortcodes Instagram object
Foursquare
ID
User unique identifier
–
List of pairs
Timeline
Venue object
(tweet id,venue id)

Following the idea that an activity on one platform can
indicate future activity on another one, an interesting study
would be to see whether it is possible to infer information
from one OSN regarding another one. For example, whether
it is possible to predict topics, interests or intentions. An
example of this type of work can be found in [4], where the
authors use Twitter timelines to infer venue type visits.

4.4

5.

• From Foursquare: using the venue ID, the venue object
can be retrieved, containing information such as venue
type, venue name and location [3].

6.

DISCUSSION

REFERENCES

[1] CrossOSN-crawler code repository.
https://github.com/hanveiga/CrossOSN-crawler.
[2] R. O. et al. Of Pins and Tweets: Investigating how users
behave across image- and text-based social networks. In
ICWSM 2014.
[3] Foursquare. Foursquare API overview, 2015 (accessed May
2, 2015). https://developer.foursquare.com/overview/.
[4] M. I. Han Veiga. Task Driven Information Valuation.
Zürich, 2015.
[5] Y. Hu, L. Manikonda, and S. Kambhampati. What we
instagram: A first analysis of instagram photo content and
user types.
[6] Instagram. Instagram API overview, 2015 (accessed May 2,
2015). https://www.instagram.com/developer.
[7] X. Kong, J. Zhang, and P. S. Yu. Inferring anchor links
across multiple heterogeneous social networks. In CIKM
2013.
[8] R. Kumar and A. Tomkins. A characterization of online
browsing behavior. In WWW 2010.
[9] D. Lazer, A. Pentland, and et al. Computational social
science. Science, 323(5915):721–723, 2009.
[10] B. H. Lim, D. Lu, T. Chen, and M.-Y. Kan. #mytweet via
instagram: Exploring user behaviour across multiple social
networks. In ASONAM 2015.
[11] M. Naaman, J. Boase, and C.-H. Lai. Is it really about
me?: Message content in social awareness streams. In
CSCW 2010.
[12] S. Tan, Z. Guan, D. Cai, X. Qin, J. Bu, and C. Chen.
Mapping users across networks by manifold alignment on
hypergraph.
[13] Twitter. Twitter Rest API overview, 2015 (accessed May 2,
2015). https://dev.twitter.com/rest/public.
[14] R. Zafarani and H. Liu. Connecting users across social
media sites: A behavioral-modeling approach. In KDD
2013.

In this section we present a use case for this dataset in a
cross-OSN user identification task. Then, we elaborate on
other tasks that can find this collection useful.

User Identification

The task of user identification is concerned with matching profiles from different domains belonging to the same
natural person [14]. In this scenario, we use Instagram and
Twitter as our data sources. A simple, yet powerful baseline algorithm is used, which compares the similarity of the
nicknames on the respective platforms.
By assigning minimal Levenshtein distance between user
names and choosing the one with the lowest edit distance,
we attain a matching accuracy of 70.1%. If the user names
are preprocessed by converting them to lowercase (as in both
these social networks the letter case does not make a difference), we attain an accuracy of 72.8%. One can think of
many more advanced schemes tracking common topics or
writing styles across social networks.

4.2

CONCLUSION

In this paper, we described the collection, structure and
properties of a benchmarking corpus of cross-platform OSN
user profiles useful for a wide range of privacy-related research questions. It encompasses hundreds of user triples,
millions of tweets and thousands of Instagram and Foursquare
posts. In order to reduce the inherent amount of noise in
the dataset, we ensure a focus on English-speaking users and
perform spammer identification. To the best of our knowledge, this dataset is the first of its kind both in nature as
well as scale.

• From Instagram: using the user ID, a profile object
containing information such as the name, location, date
of creation of account, and with the post shortcode
from Instagram, an Instagram object containing the
link with the image and related metadata [6].

4.1

Aggregated OSN topic modelling

Because OSNs can carry different information depending
on their functionality, the access to several profiles from the
same user across different platforms might give an advantage
when modelling the user. These user models can be used
for targeted advertisement or recommender systems. An
interesting task would be to compare whether the inclusion
of different profiles can benefit the models or not.

• From Twitter: using the user ID, a profile object that
contains information such as the name, location, date
of creation of account, and with the post ID, a the
tweet object, containing the tweet and metadata [13].

4.

Cross-OSN inference

Content generation and spreading

In [2], the authors study how users behave across Pinterest and Twitter. Other papers study Twitter or Instagram
alone [11, 5]. It would be interesting to study the behaviour
of users in these OSNs while having access to their multiple profiles. This could help answer whether some topics
are OSN-specific or whether the activity in one profile can
indicate future activity in another profile.

668

