DAJEE: A Dataset of Joint Educational Entities for
Information Retrieval in Technology Enhanced Learning
Vladimir Estivill-Castro

Carla Limongelli

School of ICT
Griffith University
170 Kessels road, Nathan
QLD, 4111, Australia
v.estivill-castro@griffith.edu.au

Dept. of Computer Science
and Automation
Roma Tre University
Via della Vasca Navale, 79
Rome, Italy
limongel@dia.uniroma3.it

ABSTRACT

Matteo Lombardi,
Alessandro Marani
School of ICT
Griffith University
170 Kessels road, Nathan
QLD, 4111, Australia
{matteo.lombardi,alessandro.marani}
@griffithuni.edu.au

sources and data in general. Although usually MOOCs resources do not include metadata, it is still possible to derive
some educational traits of resources from the data about
courses. Other information about courses and instructors
can be extracted too.
Hence, this paper presents DAJEE, a DAtaset of Joint Educational Entities, to gather this information from MOOCs
and provide an important asset for IR applications in TEL.

In the Technology Enhanced Learning (TEL) community,
the problem of conducting reproducible evaluations of recommender systems is still open, due to the lack of exhaustive
benchmarks. The few public datasets available in TEL have
limitations, being mostly small and local.
Recently, Massive Open Online Courses (MOOC) are attracting many studies in TEL, mainly because of the huge
amount of data for these courses and their potential for many
applications in TEL. This paper presents DAJEE, a dataset
built from the crawling of MOOCs hosted on the Coursera platform. DAJEE oﬀers information on the usage of
more than 20,000 resources in 407 courses by 484 instructors, with a conjunction of diﬀerent educational entities in
order to store the courses’ structure and the instructors’
teaching experiences.

1.1

Other datasets in TEL

Presently, the most used datasets in TEL are based on
Learning Objects (LO) available on Learning Object Repositories (LORs). One of the most popular LOR is MERLOT1 [5], referencing to more than 40.000 LOs on the Web.
MERLOT does not store the materials, just the URL and
the metadata. However, there is some concern about the
completeness of the metadata of LOs in LORs [6], and the
inability of current schemata of metadata to provide useful
information for the recommendation of LOs [3].
Similarly to MERLOT, this contribution presents a reference dataset of teaching resources, where only the data
about the resources are stored in the repository. Unlike
MERLOT and other LORs, our dataset also stores contextual information about how resources have been practically
used in courses by instructors, with a clear distinction of
the diﬀerent educational entities (lessons, concepts and resources). A LO indeed can vary from a very small lesson
about one concept to an entire course. Instead, the goal
of this dataset is to provide educational data of resources,
courses, lessons and instructors independently, so that a
wider variety of IR systems in TEL can be proposed and
evaluated with such a dataset.

Keywords
TEL dataset, Educational Dataset, MOOC, Coursera

1. INTRODUCTION
The increasing trend of contributions on Information Retrieval (IR) and recommender systems in TEL brought to
the attention of the research community the lack of large
and exhaustive datasets for a reproducible and significant
evaluation of those systems [1, 5].
At the same time, the idea of Massive Open Online Courses
(MOOCs) has raised the interest of the TEL community
[2, 1]. These courses are publicly available worldwide and
usually oﬀer a very qualitative learning service. One of the
largest and popular platform hosting MOOCs is Coursera [2]
of Stanford University. On Coursera there are hundreds of
high-quality courses delivered by prestigious universities all
around the world. It is not diﬃcult to see MOOCs platforms,
specially Coursera, as a potential dataset of educational re-

2.

EDUCATIONAL DATA IN COURSERA

At the moment, Coursera is recognised as the largest platform hosting MOOCs with more than 1,700 courses delivered by 147 institutions2 . The Coursera APIs v13 deliver
little information, only a few attributes of about 100 courses.
For these reasons, we have developed a crawler of data from
Coursera in order to build a dataset of teaching resources.
The dataset actually stores the URL to the resources on

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.

1

https://www.merlot.org
Source: https://www.coursera.org on 22/01/2016
3
https://tech.coursera.org/app-platform/catalog/ accessed
on 22/01/2016
2

SIGIR ’16, July 17-21, 2016, Pisa, Italy
c 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07. . . $15.00
⃝
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2914670

681

Figure 1: An example of learn-type (a) and course-type (b) format of courses in Coursera.
Entity
University
Instructor
Course
Category
Lesson
Concept
Resource

Coursera, not the resources themselves, with information
about i) the resources, ii) the courses where they have been
delivered, and iii) the instructors who delivered them on
Coursera. We briefly present the structure of Coursera4 and
the data that we have been able to crawl.
The courses are divided into weeks, which are, in essence,
lessons. Usually, a course has a presentation page with a
section for the abstract, the course syllabus and instructors
among other information. In Coursera we have found two
types of courses: learn and course; this distinction is stated
directly in the URL of the courses. The course-type courses
oﬀer a more informative presentation page reporting also the
category of a course (not available for the other type). Instead, the learn-type courses have a more meaningful internal structure, where a concept can be associated with more
than one resource. In course-type courses, resources are directly delivered in lessons with no mention of concepts, so
for those courses we considered the title of the resources as
the target concept. Independently of the course type, not all
courses have a preview of their content and structure. When
there is a preview, the content of the course can be accessed
without enrolling; it is suﬃcient to be logged in on Coursera.
Figure 1a shows the structure of a learn-type course with a
preview available. As we can see, i) the course has at least
one instructor, ii) it is divided into weeks or lessons, iii) each
lesson is divided into concepts and iv) the concepts contain
the resources. Such structure is maintained in our dataset.
The resources delivered on Coursera are mostly videos,
but in learn-type courses there are other types of resources.
Interestingly, most of the videos have downloadable transcripts; valuable data for applying text-mining and IR tools.
This analysis of Coursera unveiled the potential of a big
and well-characterized dataset of teaching resources. Hence,
we designed and implemented a crawler for extracting resources and educational data around them. An educational
entity from Coursera was saved in this dataset, upon condition that all the compulsory attributes (reported in bold
in Section 3) were extracted. In addition, some learn-type
courses allowed access only to the first week of the course,
so only the data of the first lesson have been crawled. Moreover, some instructors did not present their aﬃliation in

Number of crawled instances
99
484
407
46 (10 root categories)
2,365
8,716
22,663

Table 1: Summary of educational entities of Coursera included in DAJEE.

their page, so they have not been included in the set of instructors of a course. Consequently, a course resulting with
no instructors has not been recorded in the dataset. Table 1 reports the amount of the crawled data that are in
DAJEE.

2.1

Some considerations of resources types and
purposes in Coursera
Resource type
Exam
Peer
Quiz
Programming

Title Prefix
Quiz
Assignment
Review Classmates
Practice Quiz
Assignment

URL Suﬃx
give-feedback
-

Table 2: Pattern of resource titles and URL for some
resource types in Coursera.

While exploring the resources delivered on Coursera, we
found a number of diﬀerent resource types, mostly in learntype courses. This diﬀerence is reported directly in the URL
of the resource, corresponding to this pattern:
.../ < course U RL > / < resource type > /....
So, during the crawling phase, the type of a resource is extracted from the URL and associated with the resource, with
two exceptions. The type lecture has been renamed to video
because a lecture was always delivered with video resources.
The crawled resources of type supplement always refer to
further reading or insights, so the type for those resources is
document and the purpose is supplement. With these con-

4

The structure presented here is related to the time of
the crawling design, implementation and running that took
place in from August to November 2015.

682

3.5

siderations, the types of resources available in DAJEE are:
exam, peer, quiz, document, video and programming.
In addition, when analysing the title of the crawled resources, we identified a pattern that is applied to all the
resource types, with the exception of videos and supplements. The first terms of the title specify the purpose of
the resource with this pattern: < resource purpose >:<
resource title >. Moreover, all the resources of type peer
have their URL ending with /give − f eedback. Table 2 summarises these patterns used for attaining the purpose of the
resources, where a title prefix is the substring until the first
occurrence of colon, and the URL suﬃx is the substring from
the last occurrence of ’/’. Taking into account the latter
considerations, the dataset oﬀers resources for the following
purposes: presenting, examination, supplement, feedback, assessing and practice quiz.

Concept

This entity is very simple and consists of id (key), name
and language (can be empty). The name of a concept is
composed by the title of the concept (as found on the webpage) and the name of the lesson, following this pattern:
< concept name >::< lesson name >. We chose such representation since some concepts have very generic titles; it
is more expressive to include the name of the lesson, with
an easy separation using two colons. The language of a concept is not specified on Coursera, but it has been derived
analysing the transcripts of its video resources. If no video
resources are associated with the concept, then language is
empty.

3.6

Lesson

This entity is a container of concepts and it is not directly
reported in Coursera. It is recognized from headers of a
course web-page that either contains the concepts, for learntype courses (refer to Figure 1a), or resources, for coursetype courses (see Figure 1b). In case of learn-type courses,
a lesson matches with a week, while for course-type courses
that may not be the case. The following attributes exist
for this entity: id (key), name, concepts, prerequisites,
description, id cm (id of the concept map), version cm
(version of the concept map). Concepts is a collection of id
of the table concept, separated by a comma, and it refers to
the concepts taught in the lesson. Prerequisites reports the
list of ids of the previous lessons (for Coursera only one),
in order to keep trace of the sequencing of the lessons as
found in the course. Description of a lesson is not always
available on Coursera, but it is never empty in the dataset.
The descriptions of lessons start with a prefix reporting the
number of the week in which the lesson is delivered (i.e. week
1 - descriptionText). We adopted this approach because a
week in course-type courses usually refers to more than one
container (headers) of concepts, as Figure 1b shows. Finally,
the attributes id cm and version cm identify the concept
map of a course.

3. THE DAJEE DATASET
DAJEE is a MySql Database (DB) that hosts the data of
the educational entities reported in Table 1 and described
afterwards. For a better understanding, Figure 2 shows the
E-R diagram of the DB reporting all the entities in DAJEE.
We chose a low level of normalization of the DB because it
is for consulting purposes only. Bear in mind that the bold
attributes of an entity had to be crawled from Coursera,
otherwise the entity would not have been included in the
dataset. Furthermore, if a course did not have the compulsory data, then all the related entities were discarded.

3.1 University
It just reports the name and URL of the universities of
courses and instructors. It also has an id field for being
identified within the DB; this is the key of this entity.

3.2 Instructor
It also has an id field as key. Other information is about
the name, university , position in the university (it can be
NULL) and the website (it may be empty). In addition, the
pair name and university must be unique.

3.7

3.3 Course

Concept Map

In education, a concept map is a very powerful way to
represent the course domain, namely the concepts taught in
a course and their arrangement. In this dataset, a concept
map (table conceptmap) consists of the concepts and their
sequencing in a course on Coursera, connecting a course with
its concepts. A concept map is related to only one course,
thus the id consists of the prefix ”coursera:” and the course
code (e.g. coursera:positive-psychology). The prefix is helpful to distinguish possible matching of course codes from
other MOOCs platforms. With a diﬀerent crawling of the
same platform, we may find some diﬀerences for a concept
map, so the attribute version identifies a particular arrangement of the map. To sum up, a concept map is uniquely
identified by id and version. For an id of a concept map,
there is a record for each concept of the map, reporting the
id of the concept (conceptID) and the id of the previous
concept (prerequisite), if any.

This entity has many attributes, being one of the most
informative entity in Coursera. These are the attributes: id
(key), title, URL, course code, language, id university ,
length, length description (NULL), short description (it can
be empty), description and subtitles (it can be empty). More
in depth, the course code is extracted from URL and uniquely
identifies courses in Coursera. The length is not always reported in the presentation page of the course. If not available, it is determined as the sum of the duration of the resources delivered in the course. The field length description
is an indicative duration of the course; usually they show either the following wording, ”6 weeks of study, 5-7 hours/week”
or the following one, ”4-6 hours/week”. The attribute short
description is extracted for only the course-type courses (41
courses) when provided; it is not reported for learn-type
courses. Finally, category is a comma-separated list of ids of
the table Category.

3.8

3.4 Category

Teaching Context

This entity connects together concept maps, instructors
and courses via the following attributes: id cm, version cm,
id course and id instructor (foreign keys to the respective
tables).

This entity represents a category with the following attributes: id (key), id root category (equal to -1 if the category is root) and name.

683

Figure 2: The Entity-Relationship diagram of the current version of the dataset.

3.9 Resource

the resources and their arrangement in courses. Text-mining
tools can also be applied to the transcripts of resources for
discovering further knowledge about instructors and courses.
This knowledge can be helpful for supporting course design
and lesson planning [4], helping in the creation of learning
activities [3] among other applications. Moreover, DAJEE is
expected to be useful for conducting a comparative and reproducible evaluation of recommender systems in TEL [5, 1].
Finally, it may also help to address the cold start problem
of recommender systems [7] in TEL.
DAJEE can be accessed publicly for research purposes
only, following the authors’ approval. Researchers can apply
for it by filling in the form at http://144.6.235.142/dajee.

A resource entity has the following attributes: id (key),
title, type, URL, length and language. The attribute type
consists of six values introduced in Section 2.1. The length
can be zero, specially for document and programming resources where the duration was never specified. The language of a resource is determined by extracting the language
of the transcript using the tool Apache Tika5 . If the transcript was not available or not provided, the language of the
concept to which it belongs was assigned (it can be empty).

3.10 Resources Terms Frequency
For copyright issues, the transcripts of the video resources
are not included in this dataset. However, the table named
resource terms frequency provides the frequency and normalised frequency of each stemmed term in the transcript of
a resource. The stop words are not included in this table.
For further text analysis, the plain transcript can be easily
downloaded from the web-page of the resource, following the
URL in table resource.

5.

[1] Drachsler, H., Verbert, K., Santos, O. C., and
Manouselis, N. Panorama of recommender systems to
support learning. In Recommender systems handbook.
Springer, 2015, pp. 421–451.
[2] Kay, J., Reimann, P., Diebold, E., and
Kummerfeld, B. Moocs: So many learners, so much
potential... IEEE Intelligent Systems, 3 (2013), 70–77.
[3] Krieger, K. Creating learning material from web
resources. In The Semantic Web. Latest Advances and
New Domains. Springer, 2015, pp. 721–730.
[4] Limongelli, C., Lombardi, M., Marani, A.,
Sciarrone, F., and Temperini, M. A
recommendation module to help teachers build courses
through the moodle learning management system. New
Review of Hypermedia and Multimedia (2015), 1–25.
[5] Lombardi, M., and Marani, A. A comparative
framework to evaluate recommender systems in
technology enhanced learning: a case study. In
Advances in Artificial Intelligence and Its Applications.
Springer, 2015, pp. 155–170.
[6] Palavitsinis, N., Manouselis, N., and
Sanchez-Alonso, S. Metadata quality in learning
object repositories: a case study. The Electronic
Library 32, 1 (2014), 62–82.
[7] Shani, G., and Gunawardana, A. Evaluating
recommendation systems. In Recommender systems
handbook. Springer, 2011, pp. 257–297.

3.11 Association Concept - Resource
This is a relationship with attributes connecting concept
and resource. The table that implements the relationship
that a resource is for a concept is named association concept
resource. The key of this table consists of concept and resource (foreign keys), and the attribute is purpose. The
purposes available in DAJEE are reported in Section 2.1.

4. CONCLUSIONS
This paper presents DAJEE, a dataset for TEL applications obtained from the crawling of data in MOOCs hosted
on Coursera. DAJEE presently refers to more than 20.000
resources, which is already half of the number of LOs in
MERLOT. In the future, the number of resources is expected to increase significantly with the crawling of other
MOOCs platforms.
DAJEE provides data about lessons, courses and instructors when resources have been delivered. Therefore, data
mining and IR techniques can be employed to extract the
teaching patterns and preferences of instructors by analysing
5

REFERENCES

https://tika.apache.org/

684

