SOGOU-2012-CRAWL: A Crawl of Search Results
in the Sogou 2012 Chinese Query Log
Stewart Whiting & Joemon M. Jose

Omar Alonso

School of Computing Science,
University of Glasgow,
Scotland, UK.

Microsoft Corp.
Mountain View,
California, USA.

{stewh,jj}@dcs.gla.ac.uk

omalonso@microsoft.com

ABSTRACT

More recent query logs are available for learning to rank tasks however their queries and result domains/URLs have been mapped
to arbitrary tokens to ensure privacy, thereby making content-based
analysis impossible.
In recent years, Sogou1 , a major Chinese portal and web search
engine, has made several large-scale Chinese web search engine
query logs openly available for research. While this means that
some analysis inevitably requires Chinese language skills, many
findings are likely to be generalisable to IR systems in other languages since they are based on language-independent behavioural,
temporal and textual statistical distributions.
To the best of our knowledge, there is no sufficiently large nor
recent query log with accompanying result crawl openly available.
A query log without result crawl impedes deeper content analysis of search results for tasks such as query classification, intent
modelling and indexing strategies. Hence, in this work we present
a supplementary result crawl dataset to augment the Sogou 2012
query log with the full HTML content of clicked result URLs –
thereby offering many opportunities for novel research.
The Sogou 2012 query log contains 43.5M low-level interactions
(e.g., queries submitted, results clicked with their ranking, and result page inspection depth) from 0:05am 30th December 2011 to
4:58pm 1st January 2012. Accordingly, the query log offers considerable depth into search activity over a relatively short period,
as opposed to a small sample of search activity over a longer period as is more common in previous datasets. The query log only
contains search results clicked - so analysis of non-clicked results
cannot be performed. The dataset we prepared and present in this
paper, named SOGOU-2012-CRAWL, is a crawl of 1.4M search
results clicked in this Sogou query log. We detail the construction
and release of this dataset in Section 2.
To indicatively demonstrate the potential of SOGOU-2012CRAWL for IR research, we study some of its languageindependent content and query-biased temporal dimensions. In particular, we consider the following questions: (i) to what extent do
web pages contain dates? (ii) how are the dates distributed in those
web pages? (iii) can the temporal intent of a query (or similarly, its
topic) be determined based on the dates contained in clicked, and
therefore assumed implicitly relevant web pages?

In 2012, Sogou, a major Chinese web search engine released a
large-scale query log containing 43.5M user interactions, including submitted queries and clicked web page search results. This
query log offers a deep sample of queries over a two day period
from 30th December 2011 to 1st January 2012. In August 2013,
we identified 1.4M predominantly Chinese language unique search
result URLs that were clicked at least three times in this query log.
We crawled the HTML content of these URLs to construct the supplementary SOGOU-2012-CRAWL dataset, which we release in
this work. A real large-scale query log with accompanying crawl
such as this offers several opportunities for reproducible information retrieval (IR) research, including query classification, intent
modelling and indexing strategy. In this paper we first detail the
query log and crawl dataset construction and characteristics. Following this, to demonstrate potential applications we use the crawl
to indicatively analyse various time-based patterns in web content
and search behaviour. In particular, we study the distribution of
language-independent date expressions in the crawled web content. Based on this, we propose a simple approach for modelling
the past/present/future temporal intent of queries based on the date
the query was submitted by the user, and the dates appearing in
the clicked search results. We observe several prominent temporal
patterns which may lead to novel time-aware IR approaches.

1.

INTRODUCTION

A great deal of research in information retrieval (IR) is based
on analysing the past behaviour of real IR system users. Such
user interaction is captured in a query log which comprises a rich
time-stamped record of past user actions such as query input, result clicks and result page navigation. From the lowest-level interactions, higher-level task-oriented aspects such as information
seeking sessions, topic focus, intent and implicit relevance can be
observed, studied and modelled.
Unfortunately, despite their research value, few query logs are
available for researchers outside industrial labs due to privacy concerns and commercial sensitivity. Indeed, the most recent largescale English-language query logs are AOL [9] and MSN 2006 [3].
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.

2.

SOGOU-2012-CRAWL DATASET

In this section we detail the construction of the SOGOU-2012CRAWL dataset. We have made this supplementary crawl dataset
available to download as a 15Gb archive of HTML page snap-

SIGIR ’16, July 17-21, 2016, Pisa, Italy
c 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07. . . $15.00

1 http://www.sogou.com

DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2914668

709

shots2 . The Sogou 2012 query log itself must be downloaded directly from the Sogou labs website3 .
Because of the long-tail popularity distribution of result clicks,
there is a very large number of results clicked only once or twice in
the query log. From a practical perspective, since our crawler was
based geographically in Europe we found that network speed, reliability and time outs to servers located inside China posed several
crawling technical difficulties. To alleviate these issues by reducing
the number of web pages we needed to download, we only crawled
search result URLs that were clicked three or more times by users
(for any given search query). Accordingly, we identified 1.41M
unique search results for crawling.
In August 2013, we successfully crawled 1.22M of the URLs
(87% success rate) to form the SOGOU-2012-CRAWL dataset. Although not always the case, we have to assume the URLs have not
changed since the the result click as the vast majority of the documents are not in the Internet Archive4 for the result click date.
This assumption will undoubtedly be invalid for news sites which
change daily – so temporally sensitive analysis (such as that we
perform in the following sections) must be conducted with care.
Several data cleaning stages were employed to prepare the final
crawl dataset for release. Many result URLs were unable to be
crawled because the server was uncontactable (e.g., server offline),
an error page was returned (e.g., 401, 404, 500 HTTP errors), or
had a robots.txt entry that excluded crawling. In these cases, the
result URL still appear in the crawl dataset but with content of ‘[notavailable]’ to signify a crawling issue.
Several character set encodings are commonly used in China – in
particular UTF8, GBK and GB2312. In many cases, the character
set reported by HTTP headers or HTML head tags, and the actual
content encoding were mismatched. We used various techniques to
detect this, and encode the final crawl dataset consistently in UTF8.

3.

Figure 1: Frequency distribution (from 2000-01-01 to 2013-1231) of dates contained in 1.22M search result pages crawled
from Sogou 2012 result click URLs. Plotted with a log10 y-axis
frequency scale.
ics which implicitly express a temporal expression (e.g., “brazil
world cup”). [2] integrate temporal expressions in documents into
a time-aware probabilistic retrieval model.
[6] identify and classify temporal information needs based on
the relevant document timestamp distribution to improve retrieval.
[5] studied how 150M web pages changed over 11 weeks. They
found longer documents tended to have more frequent and extensive changes made to them, and for web pages that change regularly, they do so consistently over time. Acknowledging web page
content is often dynamic, [4] incorporate content dynamics into a
relevance model to improve navigational query effectiveness.

3.2

CRAWL TEMPORAL ANALYSIS

To demonstrate the potential value of the SOGOU-2012CRAWL dataset, we perform preliminary analysis of its temporal
characteristics. First we extract and analyse the dates present in result pages in the crawl as a whole – that is, without considering the
related query times. More interestingly, in Section 4 we consider
the temporal information provided by the crawl and the query log
together. With that in mind, we further study how the dates present
in clicked result URLs correspond with the real-time of the search
queries, in order to model query-biased temporal search intents.

3.1

Extracting Temporal Expressions

For temporal analysis, we must first extract temporal expressions (in this case, date expressions) appearing in the crawled result pages. Dates can be expressed in many cultural short- and
long-forms. In written Chinese language, dates are typically in bigEndian Chinese year/month/day date formats, e.g. YYYY-MM-DD,
YYYY.MM.DD and YYYY年MM月DD日 .
From the complete crawl dataset, we extracted 5.41M dates between 2000-01-01 to 2014-12-31, inclusive, from a total of 313,211
web pages. All temporal analysis presented in this paper is based
on these extracted dates – and in the next section, the queries that
were used to find the pages containing those dates. For the purpose of this work, we relied on simple temporal expression extraction based on regular expressions. Future work will employ full
multi-lingual and diverse temporal expression tagging, such as that
provided by HeidelTime [11], to improve coverage and accuracy.
Overall, 25.7% of the crawled result web pages contain at least
one date, with an average of 17.27 (±59.7) and median of 5 dates
per page. Note the wide dispersion in the number of dates in each
web page – the majority of documents contain a few dates, while a
smaller amount have a very large number of dates. Web pages with
a single date are likely to be timestamped content, such as a news
article or blog post. Likewise, documents with several dates may be
continually revised information, such as blog posts with comments,
or similarly threaded discussion boards.
The frequency distribution of all the extracted dates over time is
presented in Figure 1. Evident is the rising frequency of dates up to
the end of 2011 – the period of time covered by the query log. Following this, the frequency of dates declines quickly, although some
of this volume may be attributed to the delayed crawling. Occasional spikes likely represent major upcoming predictable events
being discussed (e.g., major sporting events, public holidays etc.).

Related Work

In this section, we present existing work related to temporal analysis of information seeking and web content in IR. When a query
is posed to a system provides an implicit temporal clue, since it offers a signal of the user’s current interest in a particular query topic.
Likewise, temporal clues such as dates and times contained in relevant content also provide an anchor in time for that relevance. Past
work has mostly examined these elements independently.
The popularity of many queries is subject to periodic temporal trends [1], as well as event-driven temporal activity arising
from one-off events. Explicit temporal expressions are included
in up to 1.5-2% of web queries [8], such as “world cup 2012”
and “nyc weekend events”. [10] consider these temporal expressions in a relevance model. Further, [7] do the same for query top2 http://www.stewh.com/sogou-2012-crawl
3 http://www.sogou.com/labs - note that this site is available in English and Chinese language versions.
4 http://www.archive.org

710

Is there only a single date?

Do >=80% of tsd dates occur within
a window? (1, 3, 5, 7, 14, 28 days)

No

Yes

No

Yes

Is tsd auto-correlation >= 0.4,
and is there >= 10 dates?

Class: Single

Yes

No

Is there one or more time windows
containing > 25% of dates in tsd?
Yes
Class: Episodic

Class: In Window

Class: Random

No
Class: Random

Figure 2: Heuristic-based decision tree classifier for categorising crawled search result pages into temporal date distributions.

3.3

Document Dates Distribution Classes

Table 1: Date distribution classification results for the 313,211
search result pages containing dates.
Class
Instances
%

In the next step of temporal analysis we characterise the distribution of dates occurring in each individual web page in the crawl.
To that end, in this section we propose a classifier for 4 common
document date distribution classes we have observed: Single, In
Window, Episodic or Random. Each of these classes is conceptually defined as follows:
Single - web page contains a single date expression.
In Window - web page contains multiple date references, with >
80% of dates occurring within an n day period (n = 1, 3, 5, 7, 14, 28
days). An 80% (rather than 100%) threshold permits more robust
tolerance to outlying dates (for instance, a ‘today’ date on a page
containing mainly past timestamped discussion).
Episodic - web page has significant trends in date distribution, with
1 or more defined bursts.
Random - web page contains multiple dates, but with no immediate apparent temporal pattern.

3.4

Single
In Window
Episodic
Random

31.1%
15.3%
1.1%
52.3%

Table 2: Classification window sizes for the 47,831 search result
pages containing multiple dates in a window of 28 or less days.
Window Size Instances
%
1 day
3 days
5 days
7 days
14 days
28 days

Classifier Implementation

We use a classifier to label each web page containing dates with
one of the above temporal classes. To that end, we first define tsd as
the time series of dates present in the document d in the our crawl.
tsd is modelled as vector of length 5,475 (i.e., for the 365 days ×15
years, between 2000-01-01 and 2014-12-31). Consequently, the ith
index of the tsd vector refers to number of dates in the document
on the day 2000-01-01, plus i days.
We use a decision tree (shown in Figure 2) incorporating various
heuristics to determine the class of each page, based entirely on features extracted from tsd . Auto-correlation is the cross-correlation
of the signal with a lagged version of itself (1 day in this case).
It is effective for measuring temporal uniformity, and co-ordinated
bursts of dates [6]. Single and In Window (1 day window) classes
are in essence the same, except that the In Window class applies to
pages which have multiple instances of the same date.

3.5

98,177
47,831
3,317
163,886

4.

25,249
5,217
2,276
2,884
6,733
5,472

52.8%
10.9%
4.8%
6.0%
14.1%
11.4%

QUERY-BIASED TEMPORAL INTENTS

In many cases, users search for topics or similiarly, events, anchored in the past, present or future with respect to the present time
[6, 7]. We seek to identify these intents by examining the dates
present in the search results of clicked (and therefore, assumed relevant) search results. Rather than classifying the distribution of
dates present in a single document, in this section we study the distribution of dates contained in the assumed relevant documents for
a topic (that is, clicked search results) – with respect to the real-time
of the query (which we refer to as qτ ).
The Sogou 2012 query log contains 42.17M search result clicks
in total. 3.11M (7.4%) of these are for documents which were classified as Single/In Window/Episodic in the previous section (i.e.,
have a non-random date distribution)5 .
Considering each query q and the day it was used as unique (i.e.,
qi will be counted twice if it appears on two separate days), there
are 10.1M queries in the dataset. 1.1M queries (10.9%) have one
or more clicked search result which contains at least one date.
We define the query-biased temporal intent (or, qintent,τ ) in terms
of the average difference (∆, in days) between qτ and dates appearing in clicked documents (weighted by their click proportion).

Results and Discussion

In Table 1, we present the results of classifying 313,211 web
pages containing at least one date. Almost 16% of these pages have
a discernible pattern comprising multiple dates contained within
them. Single and In Window classes account for almost all documents, with results presented in Table 2 showing a windows of
1-3 days are most common for those pages. As such, we find
that for the almost 50% of search result web pages containing
non-randomly distributed dates, the majority contain either a single date, or several dates contained in a short period of days.

5 Recall, we only crawled search result URLs with 3 or more clicks, so the long-tail
may substantially increase this percentage.

711

Figure 3: qintent,τ (that is, temporal intent in terms of days past/present/future from query time) distribution of 1.1M queries in Sogou
2012. Data points less than -2000 days removed to improve graph clarity. Vertical marker at x = 0 denotes ‘today’ temporal intents.
This means qintent,τ may be negative (i.e., an intent in the past),
positive (i.e., an intent in the future), or zero (i.e., an intent
now/today). Note that qintent,τ may also be undefined in the case
that there are no dates present in any of its clicked documents.
qintent,τ is formalised as follows. For each query qi occurring at
time qt (we specify time by day, e.g., 2011-12-30), we compute
qintent,τ as:
qintent,τ =

∑di ∈Dq ∑τi ∈dates(di ) ∆(τi , qτ )
∑di ∈Dq |dates(di )|

To characterise the crawl, and demonstrate its value for
language-independent IR research, we indicatively analysed various time-based patterns in web content and search behaviour. We
first studied the distribution of language-independent date expressions in the crawled web content. Further, we propose a simple
approach for modelling the past/present/future temporal intent of
queries based on the date the query was submitted by the user, and
the dates appearing in the clicked search result pages. Based on
this model we observe several notable query-biased temporal intent patterns. In particular, we note that users’ temporal interests
are mainly concentrated on information related to now. However,
we find there are a large number of interests which extend into the
future, and likewise, up to 1,000 days into the past (shown in Figure 3). This asymmetric double long-tail distribution may offer
opportunities for detecting and supporting time-aware information
needs, so we leave further analysis and modelling to future work.

(1)

Where Dq is the set of all document results di (including duplicates) clicked for qi , i.e., Dq = {d1 , d2 . . . di }. dates(di ) is the set
of dates τi (including duplicates) present in di , i.e., dates(di ) =
{τ1 , τ2 . . . τi }. Finally, ∆(x, y) is the total days between two dates.

4.1

Results and Discussion

In Figure 3, we show the qintent,τ distribution of 1.1M queries
with clicked search results which contain dates in Sogou 2012. A
distinctive distribution of past, present and future query-biased temporal intents is evident. Most notably, there is a search tendency
centred around ‘today’ dates (that is, the time of the query interaction, i.e., 30th December 2011 to 1st January 2012), with very
recent past and upcoming future dates also common. The steady
decline in queries with far mid- to long-term past and future intents is also apparent. There are notably more search intents for
past topics, with the majority of intents going back the past 1,000
days. In comparison, the majority of future intents goes forward
500 days. Outliers are likely notable past/future events, for example the 2012 London Olympics. These event topics attract lots of
different queries and have many dates mentioned in search results
referring to published event schedules.

5.

6.

REFERENCES

[1] S. M. Beitzel, E. C. Jensen, A. Chowdhury, O. Frieder, and
D. Grossman. Temporal analysis of a very large topically categorized
web query log. J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol., 58(2):166–178, 2007.
[2] K. Berberich, S. Bedathur, O. Alonso, and G. Weikum. A language
modeling approach for temporal information needs. ECIR’2010,
pages 13–25, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2010. Springer-Verlag.
[3] N. Craswell, R. Jones, G. Dupret, and E. Viegas. Wscd ’09:
Proceedings of the 2009 workshop on web search click data. New
York, NY, USA, 2009. ACM.
[4] J. L. Elsas and S. T. Dumais. Leveraging temporal dynamics of
document content in relevance ranking. WSDM ’10, pages 1–10,
New York, NY, USA, 2010. ACM.
[5] D. Fetterly, M. Manasse, M. Najork, and J. Wiener. A large-scale
study of the evolution of web pages. WWW ’03, pages 669–678,
New York, NY, USA, 2003. ACM.
[6] R. Jones and F. Diaz. Temporal profiles of queries. ACM Trans. Inf.
Syst., 25(3):14–es, 2007.
[7] N. Kanhabua and K. Nørvåg. Determining time of queries for
re-ranking search results. ECDL’10, pages 261–272, Berlin,
Heidelberg, 2010. Springer-Verlag.
[8] S. Nunes, C. Ribeiro, and G. David. Use of temporal expressions in
web search. ECIR’08, pages 580–584, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2008.
[9] G. Pass, A. Chowdhury, and C. Torgeson. A picture of search.
InfoScale ’06, New York, NY, USA, 2006. ACM.
[10] J. Strötgen, O. Alonso, and M. Gertz. Identification of top relevant
temporal expressions in documents. TempWeb ’12, pages 33–40,
New York, NY, USA, 2012. ACM.
[11] J. Strötgen and M. Gertz. Heideltime: High quality rule-based
extraction and normalization of temporal expressions. SemEval ’10,
pages 321–324, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 2010. ACL.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

In this paper we present a major new dataset – a supplementary
crawl of the web search results clicked in the open, large-scale and
predominantly Chinese language Sogou 2012 query log. We name
this dataset SOGOU-2012-CRAWL, and release it to the research
community for future work.
While there are several query logs openly available for reproducible research, to the best of our knowledge, there is no recent
large-scale query log accompanied by the content of clicked search
results. As a result, this dataset opens up several new opportunities
for information retrieval research challenges such as query classification, intent modelling and indexing strategy.

712

