Community-based Cyberreading for Information
Understanding
Zhuoren Jiang
Institute of Computer
Science and
Technology
Peking University
Beijing, China,
100871

Xiaozhong Liu

∗

School of Informatics
and Computing
Indiana University
Bloomington
Bloomington, IN,
USA, 47405

Liangcai Gao

∗

Institute of Computer
Science and
Technology
Peking University
Beijing, China,
100871

jiangzr@pku.edu.cn liu237@indiana.edu glc@pku.edu.cn
ABSTRACT

tangzhi@pku.edu.cn

reading a paper, he/she may require different kinds of assistance to
understand the specific sentences/paragraphs/sections/formulas in
the paper. Meanwhile, given the same piece of text/formula in a
paper, other users may need different types of help, such as personalized information understanding.
In this study, we propose two different kinds of information understanding scenarios: information understanding via readerreader collaboration and information understanding via Open
Education Resources (OER) recommendation. The former scenario is based on prior studies in collaborative scaffolding (a.k.a.
peer support) studies in education domain [9, 10]. Despite some
criticism, evidence shows that the benefits of this type of peer support exceed its limitations, and that readers can learn from each
other for information understanding (physical collaboration). The
latter type is based on the pilot-evidence that accessing multi-modal
OER about a scholarly publication, including presentation videos,
slides, source code or Wikipedia pages, in a collaborative framework will enhance a student’s ability to understand the paper itself [6]. However, different kinds of readers, given the same publication content, may prefer different kinds of OERs for information understanding. A reader community (sharing the similar information needs) may prefer similar OERs, and when we don’t have
reader statistics, (virtual) ‘community’ can be a latent variable.
In this paper, we propose a novel collaborative cyberreading environment, OER-based Collaborative PDF Reader (OCPR), which
enables reader collaboration and community-based OER recommendation for information understanding.
The contribution of this paper is threefold. First, we propose a
novel method to group readers into a number of physical communities, and readers from the same groups are more likely to collaborate while reading. Second, when readers don’t want to collaborate,
we propose the new algorithm to group similar users into virtual
communities for information need estimation and OER recommendation. Last but not least, an experiment (with 60 participants) is
employed to validate the usefulness of the proposed methods. Experiment results show our methods can significantly improve OER
recommendation performance for information understanding.

Although the content in scientific publications is increasingly challenging, it is necessary to investigate another important problem,
that of scientific information understanding. For this proposed problem, we investigate novel methods to assist scholars (readers) to
better understand scientific publications by enabling physical and
virtual collaboration. For physical collaboration, an algorithm will
group readers together based on their profiles and reading behavior, and will enable the cyberreading collaboration within a online
reading group. For virtual collaboration, instead of pushing readers to communicate with others, we cluster readers based on their
estimated information needs. For each cluster, a learning to rank
model will be generated to recommend readers’ communitized resources (i.e., videos, slides, and wikis) to help them understand the
target publication.

Keywords
Information Understanding, Cyberreading, Education, User Study

1.

Zhi Tang
Institute of Computer
Science and
Technology
Peking University
Beijing, China,
100871

INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION

STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics)
publications, for various reasons, generally do not place a premium
on writing for readability, and young scholars struggle to understand the scholarly literature available to them. Unfortunately, few
efforts have been made to help graduate students and other junior
scholars understand and consume the essence of those scientific
readings. In other words, while scholarly search and recommendation algorithms are well-documented, few studies address a critical problem – scientific information understanding. Compared
to search and recommendation, information understanding can be
more challenging. It can be more difficult to characterize user (implicit and explicit) information needs when a user is reading a paper, and it can be even more challenging to address the personalization problem. For example, one can assume that when a user is
∗Xiaozhong Liu and Liangcai Gao are the corresponding authors
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR’16, July 17-21, 2016, Pisa, Italy.
c 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07 ...$15.00.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2914744.

2.

RELATED WORK

From an educational viewpoint, scaffolding has been widely used
in educational research [10]. In particular, a collaborative scaffolding study [3] finds that students achieved better reading comprehension and metacognitive skills when reading within the context
of small team collaboration, e.g., comment on part of a document,
share ideas, and provide feedback among a group of users [11].

789

Figure 1: OER-based Collaborative PDF Reader System.
OER-based Scaffolding: capturing evidence of students’ emerging implicit or explicit information needs when reading a scientific
paper and recommending high quality OERs to address their information needs. As Figure 1 shows, by using OCPR, readers can ask
a specific question given a piece of text which serves as evidence of
an explicit information need or highlight (quote) part of a text in the
paper as evidence of an implicit information need. In either case,
the OCPR is able to recommend OERs given the textual content
and the target paper, i.e., P (OER|text, paper).
The detailed RPF and RBF features are listed in Table 1.

However, prior studies also found collaborative scaffolding approaches can be quite limited [9], and readers may not have enough
incentives to collaborate while reading. Not until recently did researchers begin to focus on the usefulness of OER. For instance,
Dennis, et al. [1] found that video presentations had significantly
positive impacts on students’ learning based on quiz scores. More
recently, Liu [4, 5] found OERs, such as YouTube video, technology slides, and Wikipedia pages, can help students better understand scientific readings. Meanwhile, information retrieval and text
mining methods, i.e., language model and BM25, had been proven
to be useful for building OER index for a large number of publications automatically [4]. However, this approach cannot accurately
address students’ emerging information need while reading a paper, especially for personalized or communitized reader information need estimation.

3.2

To Enable Physical Collaboration

For any publication, a large number of readers could potentially
access and read it. For this approach, the proposed task is to predict
reader physical collaboration. In other words, by using the features
presented in Table 1 (except for ‘reader-reader collaboration’), we
will cluster users together, and inner cluster users are more likely to
collaborate with each other. This information can be important for
online cyberreading environment, e.g., OCPR. For instance, when
a large number of readers are reading a paper, userx ’s question(s)
will be broadcast to the target reader group (userx belongs to) for
potential collaboration. Compared to most existing clustering problems, reader cluster copes with a smaller number of instances, so
we chose the K-medoids clustering algorithm [2]. Compared to Kmeans and EM clustering, K-medoids is more efficient with small
dataset. For evaluation, we use “reader-reader collaboration” data
extracted by OCPR system.
However, incentive can be a challenge for physical collaboration.
Prior studies in scaffolding show that even though reader collaboration may be potentially useful, not all the readers would like to
participate the online reading collaboration (e.g., reply to communicate with other readers).

3. RESEARCH METHODS
3.1 Reader Profile and Reading Behavior
To generate physical and virtual communities and assist readers in understanding publications, we need to generate a number
of features for reader clustering. There are two kinds of features:
reader profile features (RPF) and reading behavior features (RBF).
Note that RPF can be important but can be missing in some cases
(e.g., online journal or proceeding paper readers). Compared to
RPF, RBF can be more reliable.
To capture RBF and implement information understanding, we
designed OCPR, which is depicted in Figure 1. OCPR enables two
types of scaffoldings:
Collaborative Scaffolding: enabling readers to asynchronously
annotate PDF publications or provide feedback and comments to
existing information needs from other readers. By using the OCPR,
any reader can view other readers’ information needs, such as highlighted (quoted) parts of PDFs or specific questions/comments (as
shown in Figure 1, the question or exclamation marks on the side
of PDF). These readers also can provide their own replies and feedbacks to the existing or proposed information needs (reader collaboration).

3.3

To Enable Virtual Collaboration

To address the limitations of the physical collaboration, we propose a two-step method for OER-based scaffolding. First, by using
the features in Table 1, we group the readers based on RPF and/or
RBF. The readers from the same group are more likely to share

790

Table 1: All features for information understanding
Feature Group

Feature Name

RPF

Reader Profile
Quote Location
Quote Text

RBF
Question Text
OER Rating

Comment/Question Location

Comment/Question Quote Text

Comment/Question Content Text
Reader-reader Collaboration

Feature Description
Feature for explicit reader characterization, i.e., reader research topics/expertises (for scholars) or reader course taking
history (for students). This kind of features is not always available.
Feature for location of reader’s quote text, we assume that if readers share the similar information needs, they will launch
queries at the similar place of the reading. To generate this kind of feature, we first cluster all of the readers’ queries by
their quote text location coordinates, then we use the query count of each reader in each cluster as the feature value.
Feature for quote text, we assume that if readers share the similar information needs, their quote texts(implicit information
need) will have a higher text similarity. We use term frequency of reader’s quote text as this kind of feature.
Feature for question text, we assume that if readers share the similar information needs, their question texts(explicit
information need) will have a higher text similarity. We use term frequency of reader’s question text as this kind of feature.
Feature for reader’s OER ratings, we assume that if readers share the similar information needs, their preference of OER
will be similar. We use OER ratings of readers as this kind of feature.
Feature for location of reader’s quote text of comment/question, we assume that if readers share the similar information
needs, they will comment or have a question at the similar place of the reading. To generate this kind of feature, we first
cluster all the readers’ comments/questions by their quote text location coordinates, then we use the comment/question
count of each reader in each cluster as the feature value.
Feature for quote text of reader’s comment/question, we assume that if readers share the similar information needs, their
quote texts of comments/questions will have a higher text similarity. We use term frequency of reader’s quote text of
comments/questions as this kind of feature.
Feature for content text of reader’s comment/question, we assume that if readers share the similar information needs, their
content texts of comments/questions will have a higher text similarity. We use term frequency of reader’s content text of
comment/question as this kind of feature.
Feature for reader’s communication behavior, we assume that if readers share the similar information needs, they will
communicate more frequently. We use reader’s reply relation as this kind of feature.

the similar information needs. Second, for each group, we train an
OER-recommendation (ranking) model, and the communitized recommendation model can recommend the optimized OERs, which
could highly likely help readers (from the same group) to understand the target publication. Note that by using this method, readers from the same group don’t necessarily know each other or need
to physically collaborate with others. Instead, the group information can be used to train the OER-recommendation models. For
instance, given the same piece of text in a paper, some CS students
may prefer to access the source code for information understanding, while another group (e.g., information science students) may
like to watch a video or presentation slides.
As mentioned earlier, RPF quality can be higher than RBF (as
RBF can be noisy), but RPF is not always available. Motivated by
these observations, we propose a new method to optimize the clustering performance: (1) select the readers whose RPF are available;
(2) cluster this part of readers using K-medoids algorithm based on
RPF; (3) use the clustering result for a reader as his/her community
label and train a Maximum Entropy classifier [8] based on readers’ RBF; (4) use trained classifier to predict the community of the
reader who only has RBF. Unlike clustering, the proposed method
can enhance the informative RBF while punishing noisy RBF.
The Maximum Entropy classifier is a discriminative classifier
commonly used in NLP and IR problems. Unlike the other similar probabilistic classifiers, the Max Entropy does not assume that
the features are conditionally independent of each other. This is
particularly true in this study where our features are usually not independent (i.e., readers with same background tend to have similar
reading behavior).
In this study, by using the meta-search algorithm presented in
[4], we indexed four kinds of OERs for information understanding,
such as Wikipedia pages, presentation slides, presentation videos,
and source code, from various sites (e.g., Videolecture, and GitHub).
As shown in Figure 1, readers can get OER recommendation
from the system when they are reading a scientific paper and highlighting a piece of text in the paper. Readers can also provide judgments for the recommended OERs, e.g., rated as ‘Good,’ ‘OK,’ and
‘Bad.’ We then accumulate all the OER judgments from the same
reader group to train a learning to rank model for OER recommendation. For learning to rank model generation, we employed 56
text- and graph-based ranking features1 . For text ranking method,
1

The detailed feature list is available
http://59.108.48.32:8086/CCIU/algorithm.html

in

the

project

we recommend OER based on the language model between the
query text (in the paper) and OER content. For graph-based features, we created a heterogeneous graph, and the OER recommendation is conceptualized as a random walk problem on a heterogeneous graph. Three kinds of vertices – paper, topic and OER –
are interconnected by using different kinds of edges. We created
different kinds of meta-paths to address different ranking hypotheses, and each meta-path carries one or more types of ranking ins
r
?
is a meta-path
formation [12]. For instance, K ∗ → R ← Rvideo
function, and it means the candidate OER should relate to the important topic’s related OER and candidate OER’s type is video. We
use the random walk probability from starting (query) vertices to
(l+1)
(1)
) =
the target OER vertices following a meta-path: r(vi , vj
P
(l+1)
(1)
folto vj
(l+1) RW (t), where t is a tour from vi
(1)
v
t=v
i

j

lowing the meta-path, and RW (t) is the simulated random walk
probability of the tour t.
As this study is not focusing on learning to rank, we used a relative simple algorithm (Coordinate Ascent [7], which iteratively optimizes a multivariate objective ranking function) for OER ranking
feature integration and algorithm evaluation.

4. EXPERIMENT
4.1 Data
We tested our collaboration algorithms in a real learning environment. A graduate-level information retrieval course at Indiana
University is used for this experiment. Sixty students (masters and
PhDs) voluntarily participated in this experiment, and they were required to use the OCPR system for a semester 2 . They could use
OCPR functions to read scientific readings, ask questions, write
comments and receive access to the system-recommended OERs.
Meanwhile, we asked each participant to provide OER relevance
judgments for the top five system-recommended OERs. There are
a total of 39 valid users (who launched requests in more than six
different readings and has made more than eight OER ratings) for
this experiment. Meanwhile, there are total 626 OER recommendation requests with 3,551 valid OER usefulness judgments. For
reader collaboration, there are total 568 messages sent among 39
users.
In this experiment, we collect two kinds of RPF: 1. students’
course taking history (‘RPF-C’ boolean features), e.g., if student
has taken ‘machine learning’ and ‘statistics’ courses. 2. students’

website:

2

791

The dataset can be download in the project website: http://59.108.48.32:8086/CCIU

Table 2: Virtual collaboration performance with clustering result (* means the best result)
Feature Name
Globe Learning-to-rank(baseline)
RPF-C
RPF-TB
RPF-all
RBF
RPF-all+RBF
RBF with Max Entropy

MAP@3
0.5582
0.5643
0.5699
0.5849*
0.5523
0.5547
0.5818

MAP@5
0.6677
0.6545
0.6800
0.6960
0.6632
0.6561
0.6985*

MAP@all
0.7012
0.6958
0.7070
0.7148
0.6938
0.6868
0.7155*

technical background survey (‘RPF-TB’ ordinal features from 1 to
4), e.g., if they have expertise in ‘R’ and ‘NoSQL’.
At the backend of OCPR, we created text and graph indexes for
OER recommendation. For paper, we used 41,370 publications
from 1,553 venues (mainly from the ACM digital library). The
paper vertices are connected to 9,263 keyword labeled topics. By
using meta-search, we collected a total of 1,112,718 OERs.

4.2

Experiment results

Precision
0.3536
0.4479*
0.3567
0.3625
0.3569

Recall
0.4502*
0.4280
0.4502*
0.4133
0.3358

6.

nDCG@all
0.6822
0.6781
0.6843
0.6938
0.6755
0.6648
0.6966*

MRR
0.7340
0.7257
0.7357
0.7399
0.7209
0.7147
0.7401*

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work is supported by the Projects of National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61573028 and No. 61472014).

7.

REFERENCES

[1] Alan R Dennis, Kelly O McNamara, Stacy Morrone, and Joshua
Plaskoff. Improving learning with etextbooks. In Proceedings of the
48th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, pages
5253–5259, 2015.
[2] Francesco Gullo, Giovanni Ponti, and Andrea Tagarelli. Clustering
uncertain data via k-medoids. In Scalable Uncertainty Management,
pages 229–242. Springer, 2008.
[3] Tristan E Johnson, Thomas N Archibald, and Gershon Tenenbaum.
Individual and team annotation effects on students’ reading
comprehension, critical thinking, and meta-cognitive skills.
Computers in human behavior, 26(6):1496–1507, 2010.
[4] Xiaozhong Liu. Generating metadata for cyberlearning resources
through information retrieval and meta-search. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science and Technology,
64(4):771–786, 2013.
[5] Xiaozhong Liu and Han Jia. Answering academic questions for
education by recommending cyberlearning resources. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science and Technology,
64(8):1707–1722, 2013.
[6] Xiaozhong Liu, Zhuoren Jiang, and Liangcai Gao. Scientific
information understanding via open educational resources (OER). In
Proceedings of the 38th International ACM SIGIR Conference on
Research and Development in Information Retrieval, pages 645–654.
ACM, 2015.
[7] Donald Metzler and W Bruce Croft. Linear feature-based models for
information retrieval. Information Retrieval, 10(3):257–274, 2007.
[8] Kamal Nigam, John Lafferty, and Andrew McCallum. Using
maximum entropy for text classification. In IJCAI-99 workshop on
machine learning for information filtering, volume 1, pages 61–67,
1999.
[9] Elena Novak, Rim Razzouk, and Tristan E Johnson. The educational
use of social annotation tools in higher education: A literature
review. The Internet and Higher Education, 15(1):39–49, 2012.
[10] Roy D Pea. The social and technological dimensions of scaffolding
and related theoretical concepts for learning, education, and human
activity. The journal of the learning sciences, 13(3):423–451, 2004.
[11] Addison Su, Stephen JH Yang, Wu-Yuin Hwang, and Jia Zhang. A
web 2.0-based collaborative annotation system for enhancing
knowledge sharing in collaborative learning environments.
Computers &amp; Education, 55(2):752–766, 2010.
[12] Y. Sun, J. Han, X. Yan, P. S. Yu, and T. Wu. PathSim: Meta
path-based top-k similarity search in heterogeneous information
networks. In Proc. 2011 Int. Conf. Very Large Data Bases
(VLDB’11), Seattle, WA, 2011.

F1-measure
0.3961
0.4377*
0.3980
0.3862
0.3460

1. * means the best result; 2. RBF doesn’t include reply information

For OER recommendation task, participants rated 19.8% of the
recommended OERs as “Good”, 23.9% as “OK”, 49.3% as “Bad”,
and 6.9% as “Not Sure”. For this experiment, we use the globe
learning-to-rank as baseline [6] (without student clusters). From an
nDCG viewpoint, we score Good = 2, OK = 1, and Bad = 0.
The OER recommendation performance can be found in Table 2.
We use nDCG@3 as the indicator to train the learning to rank models. For evaluation, 10-fold cross-validation was utilized.
In experiment, all valid readers have RPF, we use 4-fold Crossvalidation to simulate the reality situation(randomly choose 25%
students, assume they have no RPF, use the other 75% readers to
train a Max entropy classifier to predict this 25% readers’ communities).
As Table 2 shows, the recommendation based on RPF (p<0.001)
and RBF with Max Entropy training (p<0.05) outperforms globe
learning-to-rank (baseline) OER-recommendation method for all
the metrics. The recommendation based on RPF achieved the best
MAP@3 and nDCG@3, while RBF with Max Entropy training
achieved MAP@5, MAP@all, nDCG@5, nDCG@all and MRR
(mean reciprocal rank).

5.

nDCG@5
0.6667
0.6546
0.6708
0.6837
0.6625
0.6491
0.6881*

formance will be compromised. Second, for virtual collaboration,
the proposed two-step method can significantly improve the OERscaffolding performance, i.e., recommend communitized OERs to
help the readers from each community to better understand the scientific publications given their information needs. When RPF are
partially missing, Max Entropy algorithm can be used to infer the
community labels by combining partial RPF plus RBF. One limitation of this study is the lack of collaboration between different
clusters. We will address this problem in the future work by exploring a soft or overlapping clustering algorithm.

As Table 3 shows, we use different kinds of feature sets to cluster the students, and the evaluation metrics are precision, recall,
and F1. In the experiment, we set the cluster number as 3 (for
total 39 participants). The ground truth is student-student communication data via OCPR. For instance, if student1 and student2
communicate via OCPR, they should belong to the same cluster.
Otherwise, they should belong to different clusters. Evaluation results shows that RPF-all achieves the best recall, while RPF-TB
optimizes the precision. When RPF features are not available, RBF
features achieve 0.3862 F1, which is lower than RPF.
Table 3: Physical collaboration performance
Feature Name
RPF-C
RPF-TB
RPF-all
RBF
RPF-all+RBF

nDCG@3
0.6346
0.6247
0.6356
0.6490*
0.6270
0.6168
0.6481

ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSION

In this study, we propose a novel task to assist readers to better
understand scientific publications by enabling their physical or virtual collaboration. For reader community detection, we employed
two kinds of features, RPF and RBF. The former one’s quality is
high, but not always available. The latter one can be noisy.
Experiment results show that: first, for physical collaboration,
RPF-based clusters are more useful to predict the user physical collaboration. When RPF is not available, we can use RBF, but the per-

792

