Computational Creativity Based Video Recommendation
Wei Lu

Fu-lai Chung

Department of Computing
Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Kowloon, Hong Kong

Department of Computing
Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Kowloon, Hong Kong

cswlu@comp.polyu.edu.hk

korris.chung@polyu.edu.hk

ABSTRACT

was not aware of, a movie by a new director catering to the user’s
taste, is more likely to be not only novel but also serendipitous.
This whole idea of calculating computational creativity for recommender system from the automated processing of mass collection of item tags requires us to address several problems. First, we
face the issue of effective user profiling. A two-dimensional collaborative filtering approach cannot be directly employed to build
a tag-based recommender system, since it cannot efficiently capture the multi-dimensional characteristic and hence, will result in
poorer recommendation performance. Second, creativity of new
ideas built upon domain knowledge are difficult to be measured
quantitatively. Besides traditional performance measurements, e.g.
precision, recall, F-1, new evaluation metrics are required. Past approaches use historical viewing frequency based distance measurement, but as user preference is a complicated topic combination,
pure frequencies would hardly express their real interest.
Fortunately, comparing to traditional user-item based recommender
system, meta-data such as tags, which are reusable and shareable,
play significant roles in helping manage online resources. As an
additional source for item recognition, tags help in revealing user
and improving user profiles that can be used in recommendation
[5]. Hence, in this paper, we explore the following challenges:
given the inordinate amount of candidate items and their corresponding textual tag information now accessible online, is it possible to automatically generate serendipitous tag combinations for
users via machine learning? For example, given an online video
recommender system, if a user has watched two videos with tag
“Romance, Comedy” and “Thrilling, Horror”, how would he react
to a video tagged by “Comedy, Horror”? Will he find it creative or
just as expected?
We assume that the historical behavior of users is a sound source
for preference estimation, the high-level semantic topics of video
tags can be regarded as a comprehensive representation of user features. There are some work on incorporating user features (e.g.
age, gender, geographic information) and their social relationships
(e.g. community groups) into a multi-way data analysis [10]. However, for video recommendation, users are more accurately clustered based on their overlapping of preferences, which can be represented by semantic relations among video tags. Integrating such
multi-facet information, user profiles can be naturally modeled with
higher-order data mining models. Tensor modeling is a well-known
approach for representing latent relationships inherent in the multidimensional data.
There are typically three steps for tensor-based recommendation:
(1) tensorial construction for multi-relational data; (2) tensor decomposition for latent feature (topic) representation; and (3) tensor reconstruction for interaction regeneration. Traditional multiway factor models suffer from the drawback of failing to capture

Computational creativity, as an emerging domain of application,
emphasizes the use of big data to automatically design new knowledge. Based on the availability of complex multi-relational data,
one aspect of computational creativity is to infer unexplored regions of feature space and novel learning paradigm, which is particularly useful for online recommendation. Tensor models offer effective
approaches for complex multi-relational data learning and missing
element completion. Targeting at constructing a recommender system that can compromise between accuracy and creativity for users, a deep Bayesian probabilistic tensor framework for tag and item
recommending is adopted. Empirical results demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method and indicate that it can better capture
latent patterns of interaction relationships and generate interesting
recommendations based on creative tag combinations.

Keywords
recommendation; serendipity; Bayesian tensor factorization

1.

INTRODUCTION

Computational creativity, a study on algorithms for computer to
generate artifacts that humans perceive to be creative, is a newly emerging field in today’s e-commerce operations. Colton et al.
[4] provide a definition for computational creativity research as:
“The philosophy, science and engineering of computational systems exhibit impersonally creative behaviors by taking on particular responsibilities.” Based on this definition, attempts including
automatic culinary recipe generating system [9] have been made
through cognitive flavor assessment. For recommendation, diversity also has become an important aspect for evaluation [11], where
content-based systems usually suffer from over-specialization, since only items similar to those rated by users will be more likely
recommended. Computational creativity is also related to serendipity, as defined in [6], a user-oriented measurement balancing between surprise and accuracy. Serendipitous recommendations by
definition are also novel. Consider a recommender system that
simply recommends movies directed by the user’s favorite director,
comparing to recommend a movie of the same director that the user
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.

SIGIR ’16, July 17-21, 2016, Pisa, Italy
c 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2914707

793

U(2)

loading D(k) . B (k) is an indicator of which factors are actually
used. Since it is fully conjugate, the sampler cycling steps are presented in Algorithm 1. In the algorithm, R is a positive integer
indicating the rank of the core tensor. λr is the weight associated
with the rth rank component. a and b are hyper-parameters for δr .
All the parameters with “ ˆ ” in the updating steps are the posterior expectation and precision. Details about the distributions are
elaborated in [8].

=
U(1)

user
video

tag

U(3)

Figure 1: CP decomposition: a three mode user-video-tag relational dataset example. The tensor can be expressed in a matrix
format: X = {λ, U (1) , U (2) , . . . , U (k) }

Algorithm 1 Gibbs sampler steps
Begin
Initialize U (k) , B (k) , V (k) , D(k)
for iteration i do
for each diagonal element r of the core tensor Λ, which is
independently drawn from a normal distribution do
1. Sample its independent conditionally conjugate posteriors from λr ∼ N (µˆr , τˆr −1 )
P
2. Update δr ∼ Ga(a + 12 (R − r + 1), b + 12 r τr2 δr )
end for
for each mode factor matrix U (k) do
1. Update binary indicator matrix B (k) , factor loading matrix V (k) and factor score matrix D(k)
2. Sample column vector conditionally conjugate posteriors
(k)−1
(k)
(k)
from Uik ∼ N (µ̂ik , Σ̂ik )
3. Update hyper-parameters
end for
end for

coupled and nonlinear interactions between entities [13]. Also,
they are not robust to datasets containing noisy and missing values. Through proper generative model, nonparametric Bayesian
multi-way analysis algorithms are especially appealing, since they
provide efficient ways to deal with distinct data types as well as data with missing values and noises. Moreover, since we are expected to recommend items not only considering the accuracy but also
the creativity and serendipity, the posterior likelihood of Bayesian
model can also be leveraged as a probabilistic ranking generating
mechanism. Meanwhile, deep networks prove great empirical success in various domains [2]. They are capable of providing more
compact nonlinear representations for feature learning. It would
be interesting to adopt deep learning in one or more of the tensor
modes and assess its effectiveness on tensor completion.
In this paper we address the aforementioned challenges through
a novel Deep Tensor for Probabilistic Recommendation (DTPR)
method. It breaks the task at hand into the following components:
1. a tensor construction stage of building user-item-tag correlation;
2. a tensor decomposition stage learning factors for each component mode; 3. a stage of tensor completion, which computes the
creativity value of tag pairs; and 4. a recommender stage that ranks
the candidate items according to both precision and creative consideration. This approach is evaluated using a real world video
recommender system, with large amount of users, videos and corresponding video description tags.

2.
2.1

2.3

PROPOSED METHODS

S(D, X) = d[P (X), P (X|D)]

Frame of the Method

(1)

where d is a distance measure function. For example, if we use
the relative entropy or Kullback-Liebler [7] divergence, which is a
common practice for many well-know dissimilarity measures, the
surprise S can be calculated as:
Z
S(D, X) = logP (D) −
P (X)logP (D|X) dX
(2)

For a typical online video recommender system, the first step is
to construct a third-order tensor from the video clicking logs; secondly, factoring the tensor using a decomposition method; and then
reconstructing the decomposed elements. Following these steps, a
three-way tensor, Tag × User × Video, is then constructed populated with the times of video being clicked by a user (Figure 1). For
the factorization part, a Deep Canonical PARAFAC Factorization
(DCPF) Model [8] is applied.
Accordingly, the next step is ranking the candidate items for recommendation. To encourage creative recommendation, it includes
the consideration of tag pair preferences from the reconstructed tensor through introducing Bayesian surprise, which will be further
elaborated in the following subsections. The preferences of users
to rank the top-N list of item candidates are then probabilistically
calculated.

2.2

Calculation of Computational Creativity

In dynamic situations, surprise is an important indicator of the
belief changing significance [1]. It can be also calculated as a
quantization for creativity measure. According to Bayesian theorem, for an observer with prior distribution P (X), the collection
of data D leads to a re-evaluation of beliefs P (X|D), the posterior
distribution. Surprise is to define the distance between the prior and
posterior distributions, specifically as:

X

Since we can regard the novel tag generation process as a tensor
completion problem, based on the posterior distribution of factor
matrix U (1) , the posterior distribution for co-occurring tags t1 , t2
for user u can be written as:
p(yi1 ={t1 ,t2 },i2 =u,i3 ) =

n3
Y
Y

N (yi |x̂i , τ̂e−1 )

(3)

i3 =1 i1
(k)

(k)

(k)

(k)

where x̂i = p̂ik r Uik r + q̂ik r , p̂ik r and q̂ik r are the posterior values
(k)

Model Description

calculated from the conditional posterior of Uik r .

We briefly review the DCPF model discussed in [8]. Let Y denote an observed incomplete K-order tensor. For different types of
observation, a noise function f can be applied on, depending on
the data type being modeled [14] (e.g. Gaussian for real-valued data). The parameters of CP decomposition, {U (k) }K
k=1 , are further
represented by lower rank component factor score V (k) and factor

2.4

Probabilistic Ranking Incorporated with
Bayesian Surprise

Most existing tensor-based recommendation approaches rank the
recommendations based on the values of reconstructed tensor. For
example, Zheng et al. [15] utilize the linear add-up of the ith row

794

of each mode factor matrix. The higher weight it is, the more relevant user i is related to the topic. Since the goal of our task is
not only providing accurate but also creative recommendations, instead of solely using the final reconstructed tensor from the model,
we propose to rank the result of tensor modeling incorporating the
Bayesian surprise value for generating the top-N list of candidate
items to the users.
Using the reconstructed tensor Ŷ, for each user u, two candidate
lists can be created: (1) a list of items that the user might be interested in based on the posterior add-up values of user and item
factor matrices; and (2) a list of tag preference pairs based on the
normalized maximum values of Bayesian surprise metric. Assume
the number of candidate item is n, and the number of tag pairs is
J. J can be adjusted depending on how much compromise on creativity the system wishes to make. The score for ranking user-item
pair is calculated as follows:
Nj ∈v

Scoreu,v = wu,v

X
i=1

Su,i
PJ
j Su,j

due to its low differentiable vocabulary. For single layer DTPR,
comparing to use purely actor tags, combining information from
all these four categories increases the MRR by 1.7% (from 0.3662
to 0.3726). The 2-layer DTPR, in comparison, increases the MRR
from 0.4110 to 0.3744, which is a 9% relative increase. Comparing to single layer DTPR, the increase in P@1 is also more obvious
(36%) comparing to 1-layer implementation. This encouraging results indicate that a deep decomposition utilizing information from
multiple aspects for factor matrix can better capture the semantic
representation of user behavior.
Table 1: Results for 1-layer and 2-layer DTPR on different categories of tags.
1-layer DTPR
2-layer DTPR
MRR
P@1
MRR
P@1
I
0.1867 0.0093 0.1974 0.0099
II
0.0009 0.0013 0.0009 0.0012
III
0.2900 0.2500 0.2990 0.2541
IV
0.3662 0.2233 0.3744 0.2350
ALL
0.3726 0.2249 0.4110 0.3197

(4)

PR
(1) (2)T
is the weight matrix obtained
Where w =
r=1 λr ur ur
from reconstructed tensor, Nj is the number of tag pairs belonging to video v, in the top-J surprising list to user u. S is the surprise degree matrix of users to tag pairs. Each row vector of the
final score matrix is then ranked in descending order, indicating the
top-N weighted items as recommendation candidates.

3.
3.1

3.3

EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Datasets

We perform experiments on a large-scale real-word dataset to
verify the performance of the DTPR model on expressing highlevel semantic features of user behavior and incorporating creativity consideration into recommendation. The real-world records
were collected in three consecutive weeks at the same time slot
from Tencent QQ browser (http://video.browser.qq.com) in August,
2014. The database stores historical clicking logs of active users
extracted from the Hadoop distributed file system, with each record
referring to one video clicked. Besides the time slot, user id, video
id, number of clicks by this particular user and the total number of
clicks in history, there are four categories of information provided
as video description tag (in Chinese): (1) type (e.g. action, mystery); (2) region (e.g. US, main land China); (3) director; and (4)
actor. Based on these information, a three-way User× Video × Tag
tensor is constructed. There are 4, 071, 811 samples in total with
137, 465 unique users, and 9, 393 unique videos they clicked. The
rank of the tensor equals to 140.

3.2

Bayesian Surprise Assessment

For a subset of 3-way tensor, since Bayesian surprise is user dependent, the surprise value for each pair-wise combination of tags
is presented in Figure 3. To make the figure clear, only the first
4, 000 pairs from a total 22, 155 are shown. A higher value indicates a more diverse posterior belief. In other words, if the semantic themes from the pair of tags co-occur in the same video, a
higher Bayesian surprise would indicate that the user regard it as
more creative. As indicated from the figure, the response of users
to these 4, 000 tag pairs can generally be grouped into five folds.
Within each fold, the surprise degree of each user varies according to the past video preference. The clustering of tag pairs also
illustrates that the user preference has its probabilistic topic features. Hence comparing to traditional serendipity measurements,
which are based on fixed distance of observed records, the posterior likelihoods are more suitable for creativity evaluation, as they
incorporate the uncertainty and the cluster characteristics of user
preference.
80

User

5

Tag Completion Evaluation

10

70

15

60

20

50

25

40

30

Recall that our goal is to automatically generate serendipitous
tag combinations for users, it is important to, analyze the tag completion performance part of the proposed method first. If we regard
each type of tags as semantic words from different domains, this
problem can also be regarded as multi-task clustering. We would
like to evaluate how well the system ranks the correct items for
each user based on single category and multiple categories of tags.
Two metrics are employed for this: (1) the Mean Reciprocal Rank
(MRR) and (2) Precision at 1 (P@1). MRR computes the inverse
rank of the correct item and averages the score across the whole
data. P at 1 computes the percentage of times the ground truth item
are ranked as the top one.
From Table 1, although having high frequency of occurrence,
tags from category II “Region” have the lowest MRR and P@1

30

35

20

40
500

1000

1500

2000 2500
Tag Pair

3000

3500

4000

Figure 3: The surprise value for each user in the subset if the
two tags occur together. X-axis indicates 4000 distinct tag combinations. Y-axis is 43 users

3.4

Performance Comparison

In this sub-section, we compare the recommendation performances
with and without incorporating Bayesian surprise, using common
evaluation metrics, including precision, recall and averaged hit rate.

795

0.9

DTPRnos1

0.8

DTPR

0.7

Tagomender
LDA

Recall@n

Precision@n

nos2

0.4
0.3
0.2

0.6

0.8

DTPRsurp

0.7

nos2

0.6

DTPR

0.5

Tagomender
LDA

DTPR

Tagomender
LDA

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

0.1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Candidate video number

8

9

10

0
1

DTPRnos1
nos2

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

0.1
0
1

DTPRsurp

DTPRnos1
Averaged hit rank@n

1

DTPRsurp
0.5

2

(a) Precision@N

3

4

5

6

7

Candidate video number

(b) Recall@N

8

9

10

0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Candidate video number

8

9

10

(c) Averaged hit rate

Figure 2: Video recommendation performance comparison for single layer DTPR incorporated with Bayesian surprise (DTPRsurp ),
1-layer (DTPRnos1 ) and 2-layer (DTPRnos2 ) DTPR without Bayesian surprise, Latent Dirichlet Allocation [3], and Tag matching
method [12], with varying candidates number n ranging from 1-10.
The measures are defined as: P recision =
PNr

Nr
N

, Recall =

Nr
Nt

6.

,

1
i=1 ri
Nt

Averaged hit rate =
where Nr is the number of relevant videos in top-N item candidates, Nt is the ground truth of
relevant videos that user has watched, ri is the rank of each relevant video in the recommender pool. The pair number J is fixed at
5.
As shown in Figure 2, we compare the proposed model in single
layer and 2-layer version with and without incorporating Bayesian
surprise for item ranking. The increase of pool number will enhance the probability to recommend the favored video. Thus, the
three metrics have the trend of gradually growing. Although single layer and 2-layer DTPR have similar precision for predicting,
a multi-layer implementation allows an obvious higher hit rate,
which indicates that it can pick the correct choice of users at an
earlier stage of recommendation. Through incorporating Bayesian
surprise, the performance does degrade due to the additional uncertainty it introduces to the item ranking. However, it still outperforms both LDA and Tagommender [12] method. Considering
the surprise it brings to the users, which will in return enhance user
experience, this kind of recommending has its merits in practice.

4.

CONCLUSION

Given the increasing growth in large-scale multi-relational data, we study the computational creativity problem in video recommendation domain. To effectively learn user-item-tag correlations,
we utilize deep Bayesian tensor model, which provides an effective way for joint analysis of user and video features. Through a
scalable framework for tensor decomposition and completion, and
through introducing Bayesian surprise into probabilistic ranking,
we are able to recommend personalized items taking creativity as
a consideration. Our model can perform fully conjugate Bayesian
inference via Gibbs sampling inference. The quantization index,
Bayesian surprise, for computational creativity is assessed. Currently the creativity is valuated based on generating new combination of existent items. Creative construction for data from previously unexplored domain based on current knowledge are also
appealing for future targets.

5.

REFERENCES

[1] P. Baldi and L. Itti. Of bits and wows: a bayesian theory of
surprise with applications to attention. Neural Networks,
23(5):649–666, 2010.
[2] Y. Bengio. Learning deep architectures for ai. Foundations
and trends R in Machine Learning, 2(1):1–127, 2009.
[3] D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan. Latent dirichlet
allocation. the Journal of machine Learning research,
3:993–1022, 2003.
[4] S. Colton, G. A. Wiggins, et al. Computational creativity: the
final frontier? 2012.
[5] N. Ifada. A tag-based personalized item recommendation
system using tensor modeling and topic model approaches.
In Proceedings of the 37th international ACM SIGIR
conference on Research & development in information
retrieval, pages 1280–1280. ACM, 2014.
[6] P. B. Kantor, L. Rokach, F. Ricci, and B. Shapira.
Recommender systems handbook. Springer, 2011.
[7] S. Kullback. Information theory and statistics. Courier
Corporation, 1997.
[8] W. Lu and F.-l. Chung. Deep bayesian tensor for
recommender system. In Proceedings of the ECMLPKDD
2015 Doctoral Consortium, pages 135–144, 2015.
[9] F. Pinel and L. R. Varshney. Computational creativity for
culinary recipes. In CHI’14 Extended Abstracts on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, pages 439–442. ACM, 2014.
[10] P. Rai, Y. Wang, and L. Carin. Leveraging features and
networks for probabilistic tensor decomposition. 2015.
[11] F. Ricci, L. Rokach, and B. Shapira. Introduction to
recommender systems handbook. Springer, 2011.
[12] S. Sen, J. Vig, and J. Riedl. Tagommenders: connecting users
to items through tags. In Proceedings of the 18th
international conference on World wide web, pages 671–680.
ACM, 2009.
[13] Z. Xu, F. Yan, et al. Infinite tucker decomposition:
Nonparametric bayesian models for multiway data analysis.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1108.6296, 2011.
[14] Z. Xu, F. Yan, and Y. Qi. Bayesian nonparametric models for
multiway data analysis. 2013.
[15] N. Zheng, Q. Li, S. Liao, and L. Zhang. Flickr group
recommendation based on tensor decomposition. In
Proceedings of the 33rd international ACM SIGIR
conference on Research and development in information
retrieval, pages 737–738. ACM, 2010.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research was supported by project B-Q43W, B-Q49B, and
G-UA3W. We would also like to thank Kunfeng Lai and the Mobile
Internet group at Tencent Shenzhen for providing the data.

796

