Health Monitoring on Social Media over Time
Sumit Sidana, Shashwat Mishra, Sihem Amer-Yahia,
Marianne Clausel, Massih-Reza Amini
Univ. Grenoble Alps/CNRS
Grenoble, France

firstname.lastname@imag.fr

ABSTRACT

Aspect Model (ATAM), have thus been proposed to discover
ailments from tweets [5].
While the primary goal of probabilistic topic modeling is
to learn topic models, an equally interesting objective is to
examine topic transitions. A temporal extention to LDA
(TM–LDA) was hence developed for discovering the evolution of general-purpose topics in tweets [8]. In this paper, we
examine the feasibility of measuring and predicting ailment
transitions in Twitter, by combining ATAM and TM-LDA
into a new model, coined TM–ATAM. Our model is different from dynamic topic models such as [1,7], as it is designed
to learn topic transition patterns from temporally-ordered
posts, while dynamic topic models focus on changing word
distributions of topics over time. TM–ATAM learns transition parameters by minimizing the prediction error on ailment distributions of consecutive periods at different temporal and geographic granularities.
The effectiveness of TM–ATAM requires to carefully model
two key granularities, temporal and geographic. A temporal
granularity that is too-fine may result in sparse and spurious transitions whereas a too-coarse one could miss valuable
ailment transitions. Similarly, a too-fine geographic granularity may produce false positives and a too coarse one
may cover a user population that is exposed to different
weather conditions and miss meaningful transitions. Our
experiments on a corpus of more than 500K health-related
and geo-localized tweets collected over a period of 8 months,
show that TM–ATAM outperforms ATAM, TM–LDA and
LDA in estimating temporal health-related topic transitions
of different geographic populations. The health-related topic
transitions we unveiled can be broadly classified in 2 kinds:
stable-topics are those where a health-related topic is mentioned continuously. One-way-transitions cover the case where
some topics are discussed after others. For example, our
study of tweets from Arizona revealed many self-transitions
such as headaches and body pain. On the other hand, tweets
about smoking, drugs and cigarettes in California, are followed by respiratory ailments.

Social media has become a major source for analyzing all aspects of daily life. Thanks to dedicated latent topic analysis
methods such as the Ailment Topic Aspect Model (ATAM),
public health can now be observed on Twitter. In this work,
we are interested in monitoring people’s health over time.
Recently, Temporal-LDA (TM–LDA) was proposed for efficiently modeling general-purpose topic transitions over time.
In this paper, we propose Temporal Ailment Topic Aspect
(TM–ATAM), a new latent model dedicated to capturing
transitions that involve health-related topics. TM–ATAM
learns topic transition parameters by minimizing the prediction error on topic distributions between consecutive posts
at different time and geographic granularities. Our experiments on an 8-month corpus of tweets show that it largely
outperforms its predecessors.

Keywords
public health; ailments; social media; topic models

1.

INTRODUCTION

Social media has become a major source of information for
analyzing many aspects of daily life. In particular, public
health monitoring can be conducted on Twitter to measure
the well-being of different geographic populations [5]. The
ability to model transitions for ailments and detect statements such as “people talk about smoking and cigarettes
before talking about respiratory problems”, or “people talk
about headaches and stomach ache in any order”, has a
range of applications in syndromic surveillance such as measuring behavioral risk factors and triggering public health
campaigns.
Popular probabilistic topic modeling methods such as Latent Dirichlet Allocation [2] and pLSA [4] have a long history of successful application to news articles and academic
abstracts. However, the short length of social media posts
such as tweets poses serious challenges to the efficacy of such
methods [9]. Dedicated methods, such as the Ailment Topic

2.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.

MODEL, PROBLEM AND APPROACH

Table 1 summarizes the terminology we use throughout
this paper. By using suitable geographic granularity g (country, state, county) and temporal granularity t (week, fortnight and months), we build our document sets Dgt . While
LDA is successful at uncovering generic topics, its limitations at discovering infrequent and specific topics such as
health has already been shown [5]. The probabilistic Ailment Topic Aspect Model (ATAM) was designed specifically

SIGIR ’16, July 17 - 21, 2016, Pisa, Italy
c 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ISBN 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2914697

849

Algorithm 1 TM-ATAM: change-point Detection and
Training Ailment Distribution Predictor
1: for all g ∈ G do
2:
Run ATAM on Dg
3:
for all t ∈ T do:
4:
for all z ∈ Z do:
5:
Θtg [z] ← 0
6:
end for
7:
for all d ∈ Dgt do:
8:
for all w ∈ d do:
9:
z ← topic(w)
1
10:
Θtg [z] ← Θtg [z] + |d|×|D
t
g|
11:
end for
12:
end for
13:
end for
14:
tc = argmax m(Θt−1
, Θtg )
g

Table 1: Mapping tweets to documents
Term
Description
P
set of (tweet) posts
G
set of regions
T
set of time periods
Pgt
posts from region g during time t
Dgt
document-set built by mapping the content
of each post p ∈ Pgt to a document
t
Θg
ailment distribution vector for document-set
Dgt of region g during time t
m
distance measure between distributions

“Having tonsillitis and coughing for a straight
hour ain’t no fun.... my throat is raw!
Thank god for antibiotics and pain meds.”

t

15:
pre = [t1 , tc−1 ]
16:
post = [tc , t|T | ]
17:
for all s ∈ {pre, post} do:
18:
Atg ≈ At−1
.M
g
19:
M = (At−1|
At−1
)−1 At−1|
Atg
g
g
g
20:
end for
21: end for

Example tweet
<Sickness (0.45), Depression (0.27), Flu (0.09), Recovery (0.04), Sad (0.04), Headache (0.09). . . >
Topic vector, θ, produced by LDA
<ThroatInfection (0.57), Generosity (0.14), Doctor
(0.07), Weekend (0.07), Flu (0.07), Sick-Leave (0.07). . . >

ment topic discussions may be caused by onset of the disease or some other external factors. Nevertheless, they are
the interesting points for analyzing purposes. As an example, in Figure 2, we show the difference between ailment
distributions of consecutive months for 3 different regions
Kuala Lumpur (a city in Indonesia), Oklahoma (a state in
the USA), and Bristol (a city in the UK). The sharp peaks
obtained validate the existence of time intervals that are
homogeneous w.r.t. ailments.
t
Our problem: Given a set of documents Dgi−1 formed
by tweets originating from a region g ∈ G during time period
ti−1 , predict Θtgi , the ailment distribution of documents in
t
Dgti , corresponding to posts from g in period ti from Θgi−1 ,
ti−1
the ailment distribution of document Dg
corresponding
to posts from g during period ti−1 .

Topic vector, Θ, produced by ATAM

Figure 1: LDA vs ATAM: Comparison of topic distributions for an example tweet.

to uncover latent health-related topics present in a collection
of tweets [5]. ATAM achieves remarkable improvement over
LDA in discovering topics that correspond to ailments (in
addition to discovering general topics). The topic distribution vector generated by ATAM for a sample tweet is shown
in Figure 1. Note the stronger relevance to health–related
matters in this vector than in the topic distribution vector
generated by LDA for the same tweet. While ATAM is effective at modeling health-related topics, it is not designed
to model topic transitions over time.

2.1

2.2

Ailment prediction problem

In [8], TM–LDA was introduced to extend LDA with
modeling topic evolution over time. However, While being
quite elegant in modeling general-purpose topics TM–LDA
is not specialized to capture health transitions over time.
Let Θtg be a ailment distribution vector where the weight
of each ailment is representative of the discourse density of
ailment in the tweets originating from region g during period
t. For a region g, the interval of time spanning a set of consecutive time periods {ti , ti+1 , . . .} during which discovered
t
ailment distributions {Θtgi , Θgi+1 , . . .} do not change appreciably forms a homogenous time period w.r.t. ailments.
By definition, a homogenous time period is (nearly) homogeneous in terms of ailments. In other words, the ailments evolve in a smooth fashion within a homogenoustime period and change abruptly across homogenous timeperiod boundary. We posit that such homogenous time
periods exist after which they encounter change-points
in ailment topic discussions. These change-points in ail-

Modeling Health Topics over Time with
TM–ATAM
0.01

Kuala Lumpur
Oklahoma
Bristol

Dissimilarity

0.001

0.0001

1e-05

1e-06

850

ril

ch

ar
ry

ua

br

y

ar

r

be

Figure 2: Topic transitions over time.

Ap

M

Fe

nu

em
ec
r

be

em
ov

Ja

D

N
er

ob
ct

O

Months

To solve our problem, we propose TM–ATAM that builds
on top of ATAM and TM–LDA. We first convert inferences
of ATAM over a single document to associate with a given
set of documents Dgt , an ailment distribution, Θtg . We then
go on to find homogenous time periods . We model ailment transitions within each homogenous time period and
when a change-point is encountered we update these transitions. This is a fresh departure from existing solutions that
operate in a homogenous time period -agnostic fashion [8].
TM–ATAM, at its heart, solves the following equation.
Atg ≈ At−1
.M ∗
g

Table 2: Dataset Statistics
collection period (days)
#tweets
#tweets (health-related)
#tweets (health-related+geolocated)

Identifying geolocalized tweets: The ability to operate seamlessly at varying geographic resolutions mandates
that the exact location of each tweet be known to TM–ATAM.
Twitter affords its users the option to share their geolocation. In our case, over half a million tweets are retained
(569K as indicated in Table 2).
We examine various choices for the geographic granularities, temporal granularities and distance measures. TM–ATAM
performs better on smaller regions. We attribute this result
to the fact that tweets from smaller regions show less diversity in topics. We also found weekly ailment distributions to
be very sparse. We also used 2 distance measures to measure
distribution difference namely, cosine similarity and Bhattacharyya distance. We observed that number of tweets at
a given time granularity t may affect the performance of Cosine Similarity. Finally, we chose to work with geographic
granularity of states , temporal granularity of months and
distance measure of Bhattacharyya .
Test-bench and measures: We run our experiments on
a 32 core Intel Xeon @ 2.6Ghz CPU (with 20MB cache per
core) system with 128 Gig RAM running Debian GNU/Linux
7.9 (wheezy) operating system. All subsequently discussed
components were implemented in Java 1.8.0_60. We used
perplexity to compare between models [6].

(1)

where
Θ2g
Θ1g
t
=  ...  , Ag =  ... 
Θtg
Θt+1
g



At−1
g






(2)

M ∗ is an unknown transition matrix which is obtained by
solving the following least squares problem.
M ∗ = argmin kAtg − At−1
.M kF
g
M

Algorithm 1 contains the steps of our solution. It has two
parts: change-point detection and ailment prediction.

Change Point Detection.
We use Z to refer to the set of all health-related and nonhealth related topics. For each region g ∈ G (Line 1) we first
run ATAM over the full time period Dg (Line 2). Next for
each period t ∈ T (Line 3), we use the output of ATAM over
Dg to generate a topic distribution Θtg (Lines 4– 12). We
then examine the Bhattacharyya Distance between consecutive distributions Θt−1
and Θtg of the region g to identify the
g
most significant change-point , tc , for region g (Line 14).
The time periods preceding and succeding change-point
are termed as homogenous time periods .

3.2

In the second module of TM–ATAM algorithm, we predict
distribution of ailments in twitter discourse ahead of time for
each homogenous time period . Lines 17–20 of Algorithm 1
outline the steps undertaken to identify the detection of ailments for intra-homogeneous periods.

EXPERIMENTS

P
P (z|t|T |−1 ) =

We conducted experiments to evaluate the performance
of TM–ATAM and to compare with the state of the art.

3.1

Experimental Results

Recall that the terms change-point and homogenoustime period refer to the point in time at which discourse
density of ailments changes substantially, and the time period before and after that point, respectively. We divide
each homogenous time period into training and test sets.
ATAM is then re-run over the training set of each homogenous∗
time period . We then model a transition matrix Mtmatam
on the training set of each homogenous time period as
described in Section 2.2. We compute the probability of
"health topic" z for each tweet p of the first month (|T | − 1)
in the test set using the following formulas:

Ailment Prediction.

3.

235
1,360,705,803
698,212
569,408

Experimental setup

P (z|p) =

We employ Twitter’s Streaming API to collect tweets between 2014-Oct-8 and 2015-May-31. Collected tweets were
subjected to two pre-processing steps as follows.
Identifying health-related tweets: We filter the tweets
returned by the Decahose Stream to obtain health-related
tweets. We say that a tweet is health-related if it contains
a health keyword and passes our classification criteria. We
used 20,000 health-related keywords crawled from wrongdiagnosis.com to first filter the tweets. The process is then
automated with the help of an SVM classifier [3]. To this
end, 5128 tweets were annotated through crowdsourcing efforts. The precision and recall of the classifier are 0.85 and
0.44. Table 2 shows that out of the 1.36B tweets we collected, 698K were health-related.

X

p ∈t|T |−1

P (z|p f or t|T |−1 )
(3)

#tweets f or t|T |−1

P (z|w)P (w|p) =

X n(z, w)

w

n(w)

w

P (w|p)

(4)

Here, values for n(z, w),n(w) are taken from ATAM run on
the training months. P(w|p) is simply the number of times
word w occurs in the tweet p divided by the total number
of words in p. We then predict the future probability of
each topic in the second month of the test data using the
∗
corresponding transition matrix Mtmatam
. Probability
of word pl (wi ) for any document set is calculated as follows:
pl (wi ) =

X
z

P (w|z)P (z) =

X n(z, w)
z

n(z)

P (z)

(5)

Having computed P (w), we can compute perplexity against
the words of the tweets of second test month.

851

Empirical comparison of ATAM, TM-LDA and LDA with TM-ATAM
2

Singapore

TM-LDA

Dublin

LDA

JervisBay

1.5
Perplexity

Date:2015-May-31

Date:2014-Oct-8

ATAM

Manila
texas

1

Figure 4: Top-2 Monthly homogenous time period for
top active regions.

0.5

0

O
Ne
Il
Co
Ca
izo
wJ hio
nn linoi
l
s
na iforn
ec
er
se
ia
tic
y
ut

Ar

Ok

Av
T
Te
Ga
Pe
er
nn exa
n
u
ag
s
es
om nsyl teng
e
se
va
a
e
nia

lah

Table 3:
One-Way
(threshold: 0.815)

Region

From Topic
smoking/junkies
/drugs/cigarettes
depression/complaining
/cursing/slangs/self-pity

Figure 3: Comparison for top 10 active regions. Histograms denote ratio of perplexities. TM–ATAM is
always at 1.0.

3.2.1

TM–ATAM vs ATAM, TM–LDA vs LDA

4.

To Topic
respiratory diseases
joint pains/body pains

California
Weight
2.70
3.25

CONCLUSION

We studied how to uncover ailment distributions over time
in social media. We proposed a granularity-based model to
conduct region-specific analysis that leads to the identification of time intervals characterizing homogeneous ailment
discourse, per region. We modeled disease evolution within
each homogeneous region and attempted to predict ailments.
The fine-grained nature of our model results in significant
improvements over state of the art methods.

5.

REFERENCES

[1] D. M. Blei and J. D. Lafferty. Dynamic Topic Models.
In ICML, pages 113–120, 2006.
[2] D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan. Latent
Dirichlet Allocation. JMLR, 3:993–1022, 2003.
[3] C. Cortes and V. Vapnik. Support-vector networks.
Machine Learning, 20(3):273–297, 1995.
[4] T. Hofmann. Probabilistic Latent Semantic Indexing.
In SIGIR, pages 50–57, 1999.
[5] M. J. Paul and M. Dredze. You Are What You Tweet:
Analyzing Twitter for Public Health. In ICWSM, 2011.
[6] H. M. Wallach, I. Murray, R. Salakhutdinov, and
D. Mimno. Evaluation methods for topic models. In
ICML, pages 1105–1112, 2009.
[7] X. Wang and A. McCallum. Topics Over Time: A
Non-Markov Continuous-time Model of Topical Trends.
In KDD, pages 424–433, 2006.
[8] Y. Wang, E. Agichtein, and M. Benzi. TM-LDA:
Efficient Online Modeling of Latent Topic Transitions
in Social Media. In KDD, pages 123–131, 2012.
[9] W. X. Zhao, J. Jiang, J. Weng, J. He, E. Lim, H. Yan,
and X. Li. Comparing Twitter and Traditional Media
Using Topic Models. In ECIR, pages 338–349, 2011.

Homogenous Time Periods

In Figure 4 we show the top-2 sharpest change-points for
the top regions. Those points can be explained with weather
changes in those regions. Texas can be explained with a
drop in temperature while Jervis Bay can be explained by
an increase in rainfall. Dublin sees its lowest temperature in
November. Singapore and Manila have very similar weather
conditions and exhibit the same change point.

3.2.3

for

transitions based on the above threshold: selftransitions :
popular topics and one way transitions : ith topic is discussed before j th topic. As an example, one-way-transitions
of California are summarized in Table 3.

Figure 3 shows the perplexity ratio of TM–ATAM with
state-of-the art models. If ratio computes to be less than
"1" for competitor topic model , TM–ATAM is performing worse. If ratio is more than "1" for competitor topic
model , TM–ATAM is performing better. In order to assert
the fact that health topics transit from one to another, we
compute the perplexity of ATAM on words of the first month
of the test set and not predicting any topic distribution using any transition matrix . Hence, this denotes the case
where health topics stay static . As shown in Figure 3,
TM–ATAM beats ATAM in all social media active regions
(an active region is a region where the proportion of tweets
if high enough). For training TM–LDA, we merge the training data (same as TM–ATAM) of each homogenous time
period in each region and train a transition matrix of
TM–LDA by solving least squares problem. For each tweet
p of the first month of the test set, we compute the probability of topics using LDA trained on merged training data
(Formula 3). We then predict the future probability of each
∗
topic in the following month using Mtmlda
. We can then
compute the perplexity of TM–LDA against words of actual tweets in the test set. Figure 3 shows that TM–ATAM
consistently beats TM–LDA and LDA in predicting future
health topics on the test month. Perplexity is indeed lower
for all words of the test month in all active states.

3.2.2

Transitions

Topic Transitions

Entry mij in the transition matrix M produced by
TM–ATAM, shows the degree that topic zi will contribute
to topic zj in the subsequent homogenous time period . We
adapt the threshold used in [8] to our settings: Threshold
= µ + 2 × σnon−diagonal . We identify two kinds of interesting

852

