Ingrams – A Neuropsychological Explanation
for Why People Search
Peter Bailey

Nick Craswell

Microsoft

Microsoft

pbailey@microsoft.com

nickcr@microsoft.com

ABSTRACT
Why do people start a search? Why do they stop? Why do they do
what they do in-between? Our goal in this paper is to provide a
simple yet general explanation for these acts that has its basis in
neuropsychology and observed user behavior. We coin the term
“ingram”, as an information counterpart to Richard Semon's
“engram” or "memory trace". People search to create ingrams.
People stop searching because they have created sufficient
ingrams, or given up. We describe these acts through a pair of
user models and use it to explain various user behaviors in search
activity. Understanding people’s search acts in terms of ingrams
may help us predict or model the interaction of people’s
information needs, the queries they issue, and the information
they consume. If we could observe certain decision-making acts
within these activities, we might also gain new insight into the
relationships between textual information and knowledge
representation.

Figure 1 – A successful search process, moving from a
preingram via mingrams to an ingram

1. INTRODUCTION

There are several theories of why or how people search – some of
the more influential ones include [2][9][16]. In recent years, the
mass availability of effective information retrieval systems
coupled with enormous information resources has exploded the
amount of information system log data available to researchers in
modeling user behavior when searching. Yet because the
motivations for any individual search reside within people’s
minds, it has proven challenging to model these directly from the
observable log traces of behavior alone. While user studies have
become increasingly sophisticated, with mouse-tracking, gazetracking, and physio-logical monitoring, these often place
searchers in artificial environments and typically involve carefully
curated information seeking tasks. These experimental settings are
optimized for gathering data, but do not address the original
motivations for search in situ. Alternative ethnographic research
studies are more closely aligned with our work, seeking to
understand why searchers carry out information search and
exploration, e.g. [11]. In Section 4 we consider how our
knowledge state changes correspond to a subset of published user
behavior models for generalized information search, and the
implications for future experiments.

To build better interactive information seeking systems, we need
to understand more clearly why people search, how they formulate
search queries, and what activities lead them to be satisfied (or
not) with the information they choose to consume. It is very
challenging to build a comprehensive model of what a person
knows, or of what they do not know. However, by observing users
directly or indirectly through their long-term and short-term
interactions with information seeking systems, we can propose a
model for changes in knowledge that occur. The model should be
consistent with the observed search behavior. By focusing solely
on knowledge state changes, our model, while less comprehensive
or accurate than more contextually situated models, may prove
more amenable to extraction of significant events that can be used
as data for machine learning algorithms building text-toknowledge relationships.
For example, a query such as [olives] provides us relatively little
information about the motivation and information need of a
searcher. If instead we observe a sequence of queries: [olives];
[when to harvest olives]; [olive picking technique], interspersed
by various examined document summaries on the corresponding
search results pages and also specific clicked documents, we have
a much richer set of data from which to infer the changes in the
searcher’s knowledge. In Section 3, we name and describe
concepts for specific neuropsychological knowledge states that
arise throughout the search process.

Our contributions in this paper are: (1) provide a simple yet
general hypothesis for what neuropsychological changes occur in
people’s minds throughout the course of a search process; (2)
align these changes with observed interaction with information
seeking systems; and (3) describe decision points and acts of the
searcher that could illuminate the relationship between text and
knowledge representation as these changes occur, for use by other
researchers.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full
citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others
than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior
specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR '16, July 17–21, 2016, Pisa, Italy.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07…$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2914712

2. RELATED WORK
Taylor’s original work on information need is foundational in
describing four different levels of cognitive awareness between
inception and action within a search process [18]. Taylor’s work
is more complex than our own in characterizing different levels,

877

but does not proceed to describe subsequent knowledge changes.
Like Taylor, Nordlie conducted a comparative study within a
library information seeking environment, which suggests
dialogue-based interaction might help improve search processes
[15]. Nordlie’s observations also suggest that the human
intermediary must construct (through their dialog with the
searcher) their own mental model of the desired goal so they can
assist the searcher, a process he describes as “revealment”. Belkin
et al developed an influential theory of anomalous states of
knowledge ASK (that a user comprehends an anomaly in their
current state of understanding), akin to the visceral need level of
Taylor, and applied it to the task of improving information
retrieval systems [2]. Our explanation aligns with this visceral
need or anomalous state as a starting neurophysiological frame.
Kuhlthau’s Information Search Process framework is also
influential, describing a 6-stage series of tasks, with associated
thoughts, feelings, actions and strategies [9]; we seek a simpler
explanation. Pirolli et al developed an Information Foraging
model, inspired from anthropological theories of food seeking
behavior to describe information seeking [16]; again, this has been
influential in our explanation of partially attained states in
completion of an information seeking task. Recently Azzopardi
proposed an economic theory of user behavior to describe the
choices made during searching, hypothesizing that users seek to
minimize cognitive load [1]. We see this as primarily an
operational explanation of search activity, rather than our focus
which is more on changes in information and knowledge
acquisition.

Figure 2 – A partially successful search process, but does
not involve creation of an ingram on completion.

3. CONCEPTS
3.1 Ingram
We coin the term “ingram”, as an information counterpart to
Richard
Semon's
hypothetical
“engram”
[17].
In
neuropsychology, the engram is a memory trace that has been
physically encoded in the brain. Though science lacks a
comprehensive understanding of this, it is still useful to
hypothesize that there must be some biophysical or biochemical
change in the brain to support the encoding and retrieval of a
memory.

Figure 3 – A completely unsuccessful search process.

3.2 Preingram
If the goal of searching is the ingram, which is a change in the
state of knowledge, then prior to searching, people must in some
sense be aware of the need for an ingram. The awareness of the
absence, and the formulation of key characteristics of what the
ingram might consist of, must also be present in the mind’s
knowledge substrate. We term this awareness and formulation of
key characteristics of the future ingram a “preingram” (like a
premonition of an ingram). Taylor’s concept of “information
need” [18] and Belkin’s concept of an “anomalous state of
knowledge” [2] are obviously influential precursors to our
preingram.

Just as an engram is an encoding of memory there must be some
changes in the brain that occur during information seeking. We
propose the ingram as the change in the brain, comprising one or
more engrams, that occur during a given information seeking
process. The main outcome and motivation for search is a change
in knowledge [9][16], and that change as encoded in the brain is
an ingram. In programmatic terms we might denote this as:

We propose that people formulate search queries by mapping the
key characteristics of a preingram to (typically) a linguistic
surface form, in a similar way to how people translate their ideas
to language. The precise mapping chosen is conditioned on many
different factors, including the person’s mental model of how
search engines work, the query construction tools provided by the
search engines (e.g. query suggestions interfaces), and most
importantly, the key characteristics of the ingram that are
understood in the preingram.

SearchProcess(Person) → Person’, s.t. Person’ = Person+Ingram
That is, on successfully completing a search process, a person has
now incorporated an ingram within their knowledge memory.
For example, suppose we have an olive tree in our garden, and
wish to know when and how best to harvest the olive fruits, yet
have never done so previously. Without a lot of trial and error, the
olives may go unharvested, or be harvested at the wrong time, or
be harvested but damaged. Instead, given access to appropriate
search engine technology and assuming that our search process is
successful, we subsequently know what months to pick olives and
how to avoid bruising them, without ever having picked an olive
still. These engrams, as encodings in the brain, constitute the
ingram of the olive harvesting search process.

Returning to our olive tree example, the awareness of needing to
know about when the best time to harvest olives, and generalized
concepts like “olives”, “fruit”, “ripeness” “picking”, “harvesting”
form the corresponding preingram. A natural language expression
might be “when is the best time to harvest olives and how should I
do it”. However, since few search engines are optimally suited to
natural language queries, we are more likely to construct a search
query similar to [olive picking time] or [when to harvest olives].

878

3.3 Mingram
While simple search intents (for example, navigational search [3]
or refinding activities [19]) may be satisfied by a single querydocument pair, many are not. As described by Cole et al [5] while
investigating the practical application of Belkin’s ASK model for
information retrieval [2], there may be an “issue of unknown item
information need and the non-specifiability of this sort of need”.
In fact, it is perhaps even more complex – there are the “known
unknowns” that we seek and can partially name when our search
process commences, and there are the “unknown unknowns” that
we only discover during the process of seeking itself. We believe
that a common example of these “unknown unknowns” occurs
when searchers acquire vocabulary while reading documents, such
that they subsequently employ some of these words as query
terms that lead to satisfied search activity. Overall, what we see is
that many search sessions require multiple queries and entail
extended information discovery and progressive learning [7].

Figure 4 – Cascade model actions and decisions

To characterize the partial information accumulation aspect of
search processes, we need one additional concept – the
“mingram” (like a micro or minimal or most of an ingram). A
mingram arises in the searcher’s knowledge memory when some
useful piece of content is comprehended as part of the information
seeking process in order to form the final ingram. Once a
sufficient set of mingrams have been assembled, the searcher may
determine that the ingram is complete, and cease their search task.
Conversely a searcher may be able to assemble a number of
mingrams, but still be unable to complete their ingram. At this
point, they may either abandon their search altogether, or continue
their search process with new queries, browsing, or re-queries.
Mingrams have an analog in the relevance measurement domain,
being the “information nugget” concept described by Voorhees in
the TREC Question Answering track [21], and Clarke et al’s work
on novelty and diversity [4].
Returning to the olive example, one mingram may represent a
document passage stating that that olives are best harvested in the
fall or autumn season. Another mingram may be an illustrated
document showing that the olives change color progressively, and
these colors correspond to levels of acid in the fruit. A final
mingram may be a video showing that harvesting needs to be
careful, as the fruit will easily bruise, and suggest containers and
receptacles that can limit bruising of the fruit. Collectively, these
three mingrams then lead to the ingram that was sufficient for the
user to conclude the information seeking session.

Figure 5 – Behavior model actions and decisions

The three primary search process patterns (success, partial
success, and no success) can thus be represented by state diagrams
which show the sequencing of preingram to ingram via mingrams,
with interactions to a search engine and documents. A successful
search process is shown in Figure 1, a partially successful search
process is shown in Figure 2, and an unsuccessful search process
is shown in Figure 3. Note that these are all relatively simple
models, and make no account of interrupted search processes
(where they extend beyond a single session) or parallel search
processes (where multiple goals are pursued within a single
session). Arguably, both of these more complex behaviors can be
captured by reducing the activities involved to aggregates of these
simple forms.

gaze-tracking user studies. The decision points described by the
models may help us focus on where preingram, mingram and
ingrams arise.

4.1 Cascade model
The “cascade” model developed by Craswell et al [6] is a simple
and influential model that attempts to explain the phenomenon of
position bias – that is, that users click on relevant documents
nearer the top of a ranked list of results. The model is elegant in
its simplicity, suggesting that users traverse a list from top to
bottom, examining each document summary, and clicking with a
probability proportional to the underlying document’s relevance.
Once a document is clicked, the searcher does not return, and they
are assumed to have found relevant material. The model was the
best of four they considered in explaining click patterns in a
commercial search engine log. The model does not attempt to
describe query reformulation.

4. USER BEHAVIOR MODELING
We now turn our
explanation of why
search user behavior
to explain observed

attention to how our neuropsychological
people search corresponds to a couple of
models. These models have been developed
user behavior from log-based analysis and

879

In Figure 4, we illustrate the equivalence stages between the
simplest cascade model and the ingram explanations. The query is
assumed in the cascade model, and the equivalence is a
preingram. As the searcher examines each summary, a mingram
may (or may not) be created, depending on the content of the
summary. Then, after clicking the document, the searcher reads it
(and does not return), which corresponds to the creation of the
ingram. Ignoring “good abandonment” scenarios [10], we can
make a simplifying assumption that the summaries of skipped
documents (ones which are not clicked) do not create mingrams at
all. The decision to click becomes the critical factor in this model.
Deciding not to click means we can ignore these documents.
Deciding to click means we need to examine the summary as a
candidate for mingram creation, and the full document for both
mingram and ingram creation.

the selection and mapping of specific text fragments (queries,
result page summaries, document fragments) from user behavior
logs for the modeling of knowledge representation via new
machine learning approaches involving distributed representations
(e.g. [13]). In these approaches, our model’s simple but general
characterizations for identifying transition points in knowledge
acquisition change are preferred to more complex ones.

4.2 A user behavior-based model

[4]

6. REFERENCES
[1] Azzopardi, L. (2011). The economics in interactive information
retrieval. Proc. SIGIR (pp. 15-24).

[2] Belkin, N. J., Oddy, R. N., & Brooks, H. M. (1982). ASK for
[3]

There have been several enhancements to the cascade model. In
one of the most comprehensive, recent efforts by Moffat, Thomas
and Scholer have focused on using gaze tracking from user studies
to understand actual summary examination behavior, document
reading behavior, and query reformulations. These observations
were used to describe new user models and metrics that may be
more aligned to real behavior than some existing relevance
metrics [14][20]. In particular, their user model specifically
encompasses query reformulations, and also query abandonment
independent of having found relevant material.

[5]

[6]
[7]

In Figure 5, we illustrate the equivalence stages between their
combined user behavior model (Fig.s 6 and 7 from [14]) and the
ingram explanations. We note that this user model is still not quite
in alignment with the observed user behavior reported in [20],
where the authors found examination of multiple summaries in a
“window” of attention prior to clicking. In contrast to Figure 4,
we place a question-mark after Ingram, as the user model
acknowledges that users may abandon at any time, without being
successful, and we align it with the “End session” termination
point in the process, rather than the “Read document” activity. We
do this in part as it helps us identify the critical decisions in the
model. Again, for simplicity we assume that a summary that is
skipped does not contribute to creation of a mingram. Summaries
that are clicked may create a mingram, as may the clicked
document itself. Query reformulation is now seen as a significant
act, as it indicates that an ingram has not yet been created. It is
only when the search session ends that an ingram may (or may
not) have been created; this is a less deterministic outcome than
with the cascade model.

[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]

[13]
[14]
[15]

5. CONCLUSION
In both the cascade model and the user behavior-based model, the
mapping of preingram, mingrams and ingram to the user actions
and decisions being made (examining summaries, clicking links
and reading documents, reformulating queries) are consistent with
the three search processes we described in Section 3. The
observable acts of users, and the decisions we can infer are being
made by them, in conjunction with our hypothesized
neuropsychological changes, provide us with an opportunity to
focus future experiments on these critical points within a
searcher’s information seeking process. Future advances in
detecting and understanding brain activities (e.g. [12]) may also
enable us to observe these transitions, from preingram to
mingram, and from mingrams to ingram. Similarly, characterizing
the neuro-physiological changes occurring in searchers’ brains
throughout a search process may help us more effectively focus

[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]

880

information retrieval: Part I. Background and theory. Journal of
Documentation, 38(2), 61-71.
Broder, A. (2002). A taxonomy of web search. In ACM SIGIR
Forum (Vol. 36, No. 2, pp. 3-10).
Clarke, C. L., Kolla, M., Cormack, G. V., Vechtomova, O., Ashkan,
A., Büttcher, S., & MacKinnon, I. (2008). Novelty and diversity in
information retrieval evaluation. Proc. SIGIR (pp. 659-666).
Cole, C., Leide, J., Beheshti, J., Large, A., & Brooks, M. (2005).
Investigating the Anomalous States of Knowledge hypothesis in a
real‐life problem situation: A study of history and psychology
undergraduates seeking information for a course essay. JASIST,
56(14), 1544-1554.
Craswell, N., Zoeter, O., Taylor, M., & Ramsey, B. (2008). An
experimental comparison of click position-bias models. Proc.
WSDM (pp. 87-94).
Eickhoff, C., Teevan, J., White, R., & Dumais, S. (2014). Lessons
from the Journey: A Query Log Analysis of Within-Session
Learning. Proc. WSDM.
Hassan, A., Shi, X., Craswell, N., & Ramsey, B. (2013). Beyond
clicks: query reformulation as a predictor of search satisfaction. Proc
CIKM (pp. 2019-2028).
Kuhlthau, C. C. (1991). Inside the search process: Information
seeking from the user's perspective. JASIS, 42(5), 361-371.
Li, J., Huffman, S., & Tokuda, A. (2009). Good abandonment in
mobile and PC internet search. Proc. SIGIR (pp. 43-50).
Lindley, S. E., Meek, S., Sellen, A., & Harper, R. (2012). It's simply
integral to what I do: enquiries into how the web is weaved into
everyday life. Proc. WWW (pp. 1067-1076).
Mitchell, T. M., Shinkareva, S. V., Carlson, A., Chang, K. M.,
Malave, V. L., Mason, R. A., & Just, M. A. (2008). Predicting
human brain activity associated with the meanings of nouns. Science,
320(5880), 1191-1195.
Mitra, B. (2015) Exploring Session Context using Distributed
Representations of Queries and Reformulations. Proc. SIGIR (pp. 312).
Moffat, A., Thomas, P., & Scholer, F. (2013). Users versus models:
What observation tells us about effectiveness metrics. Proc. CIKM
(pp. 659-668).
Nordlie, R. (1999). “User revealment”—a comparison of initial
queries and ensuing question development in online searching and in
human reference interactions. Proc. SIGIR (pp. 11-18).
Pirolli, P., & Card, S. (1999). Information foraging. Psychological
Review, 106(4), 643.
Semon, R. W. (1911). Die Mneme: als erhaltendes Prinzip im
Wechsel des organischen Geschehens. Engelmann.
Taylor, R. S. (1967). Question-Negotiation and Information-Seeking
in Libraries (No. 3). Lehigh University, Bethlehem PA Center for
Information Science.
Teevan, J., Adar, E., Jones, R., & Potts, M. (2006). History repeats
itself: repeat queries in Yahoo's logs. Proc. SIGIR (pp. 703-704).
Thomas, P., Scholer, F., & Moffat, A. (2013). What users do: The
eyes have it. Information Retrieval Technology (pp. 416-427).
Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Voorhees, E. M. (2003). Overview of the TREC 2003 Question
Answering Track. In TREC (pp. 54-66).

