Investment Recommendation using Investor Opinions in
Social Media
Wenting Tu, David W. Cheung, Nikos Mamoulis, Min Yang, Ziyu Lu
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong
Pokfulam, Hong Kong

{wttu, dcheung, nikos, myang, zylu}@cs.hku.hk
ABSTRACT

explicitly considers filtering out such noisy posts by evaluating the
quality of each single investing opinion. Among previous work,
only [1] noticed that different users post opinions of different quality and propose a framework to identify experts by considering the
performance of users’ past opinions. The main difference between
our work and [1] is that [1] identifies the quality of users rather
than that of specific opinions. However it is possible that different
posts by the same user may have different quality (e.g., the user is
expert only for a subset of the investment products). On the other hand in our work, we explicitly predict the quality of specific
opinions and use additional information (e.g., content) for this purpose. Moreover, [1] only uses the opinions posted by authors in
the past to derive the characteristics of authors, while we consider
more features (e.g., social popularity) of authors.
Our work deals with the problem of predicting the quality of
investing opinions and employs this knowledge to recommend to
users high-quality opinions and portfolios to invest in. We first formulate the opinion quality prediction problem. Then, we propose
multiple categories of features related to opinion author, opinion
content and stocks that the opinion talks about. We also discuss
how to construct a prediction function upon the proposed features
using regression theory. After that, we show how to perform investment recommendation based on the predicted opinion qualities.
Finally, we conduct experiments for evaluating the performance of
investment recommendation using our methodology and competitor approaches to verify the effectiveness of our work.

Investor social media, such as StockTwist, are gaining increasing
popularity. These sites allow users to post their investing opinions
and suggestions in the form of microblogs. Given the growth of the
posted data, a significant and challenging research problem is how
to utilize the personal wisdom and different viewpoints in these
opinions to help investment. Previous work aggregates sentiments
related to stocks and generates buy or hold recommendations for
stocks obtaining favorable votes while suggesting sell or short actions for stocks with negative votes. However, considering the fact
that there always exist unreasonable or misleading posts, sentiment
aggregation should be improved to be robust to noise. In this paper,
we improve investment recommendation by modeling and using
the quality of each investment opinion. To model the quality of
an opinion, we use multiple categories of features generated from
the author information, opinion content and the characteristics of
stocks to which the opinion refers. Then, we discuss how to perform investment recommendation (including opinion recommendation and portfolio recommendation) with predicted qualities of investor opinions. Experimental results on real datasets demonstrate
effectiveness of our work in recommending high-quality opinions
and generating profitable investment decisions.

1.

INTRODUCTION

In the past few years, social-media sites (e.g., Twitter) have emerged as one of prime platforms where people share their ideas
and opinions. Some social media sites attract special categories of
users, who exchange specialized information. For instance, StockTwits (www.stocktwits.com) is Twitter-like platform for users who
share their investing and trading opinions.
Given the availability of platforms such as Twitter or Stocktwits,
an interesting question is how to exploit the opinions of investors
posted there in order to properly invest in stock markets. Previous work on the subject extracts [7] and aggregates [3, 8, 5, 4]
the sentiments of users in the posted messages into a representative
investment opinion about a stock. However, few of them explicitly consider the problem that there could be posts with misleading
opinions either by non-experts or by malicious users. Our work

2.

PROBLEM DEFINITION

Consider a collection of opinions O. For each opinion o ∈ O,
we denote by ao the author of o, by co the content of o, and by
E o the set of stocks o talks about. Moreover, we formulate a set
V o of investment views in o, which consists of (e, l) pairs, where
e is a stock discussed in o and l is the corresponding sentiment label: bullish (positive) or bearish (negative). For example, Figure
1 shows two investment opinions posted in Stocktwits. The investment views of the first opinion are {(GE, bearish)} and those of the
second opinion are {(BBUX, bullish)}.
Next we define the quality of an investing opinion o, denoted as
Q(o). In our work we regard o to be of high-quality if the investment views V o could help readers to perform profitable trading.
o
o
Specifically, suppose Ebu
(Ebe
) includes the stocks corresponding
to bullish (bearish) sentiment labels in V o . If o is of high-quality,
o
o
the prices of stocks in Ebu
(Ebe
) should significantly rise (fall) in
o
the future. Then, if a reader of o longs the stocks in Ebu
(i.e., buys
o
the stocks in Ebu and sells them in the future) and shorts the stocks
o
in Ebe
(i.e., borrows the stocks in Ebe to sell them and buys them
back in the future), the reader could obtain high profit. According

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.

SIGIR ’16, July 17–21, 2016, Pisa, Italy.
c 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2914699

881

of opinions the author posted in the past (denoted as A_onum); i.e.,
we assume that if a user actively posts opinions, he/she has higher
expertise.
The content of an opinion is also potentially related to its quality since it may explain why the authors post their particular view.
Sentiment strength in an opinion can also be extracted from the
content. Thus, we believe content features may play an important
role in predicting opinion quality. In our work, we consider wordlevel content features. Specifically, for a given opinion, we analyze
the words it contains. For each word w, we calculate w_avgqual
and w_perchigh: the average quality of opinions containing w and
the percentage of high-quality opinions in all opinions posted containing w, respectively (similar to A_avgqual and A_perchigh). Let
v a (w) and v p (w) be the w_avgqual and w_perchigh values of word
w, respectively. Then, assuming that the content of opinion o consists of words {w1 , w2 , · · · , wn }, we define two opinion content
features C_avgqual and C_perchigh, denoted by E(v a ) and E(v f ),
p
n
as the mean of discrete values {v a (wi )}n
i=1 and {v (wi )}i=1 , respectively.
Besides features related to opinion author and content, we also
define features for stocks. Similar to C_avgqual and C_perchigh,
for a given opinion, we examine the stocks it talks about. For each
stock e mentioned in o, e_avgqual and e_perchigh are the average quality of opinions talking about e and the percentage of highquality opinions in all opinions talking about e, respectively. Then,
assuming that o mentions stocks {e1 , e2 , · · · , en }, we employ the
mean of e_avgqual and e_perchigh values of {ei }n
i=1 as two features (denoted as S_avgqual and S_perchigh) to describe the stocks
mentioned in o.

Figure 1: Stocktwits platform.
to the above discussion, Q(o) can be defined as

c
f
c
1
|E o |

X p (e) − pf (e)
X p (e) − p (e)
+
c
p (e)
pc (e)
e∈E o
e∈E o
bu


,

(1)

be

where pc (e) and pf (e) are current price and future price of stock
e (in this paper, we set as future
 price the price
 after a week). In
pf (e) − pc (e) pc (e) − pf (e)
is the increase (dethis formula,
pc (e)
pc (e)
crease) rate of e’s price in the future, which actually equals to the
return rate corresponding to the investment view (e, l), where l is
bullish (bearish).
The main goal of our work is to correctly predict the qualities of
investment opinions and then use them for investment recommendation. We focus on two recommendation tasks. One is suggesting
a set of high-quality investor opinions to users (i.e., opinion recommendation). The other is recommending a portfolio consisting of a
set of stocks to long or short (i.e., portfolio recommendation).

3.
3.1

3.2

Regression-based Quality Prediction

For a new opinion oi , we extract the values of features A_avgqual,
A_prechigh, A_social, A_onum, C_avgqual, C_prechigh, S_avgqual,
S_prechigh, as defined in Section 3.1. Suppose the features of
oi are [xi1 , xi2 , · · · , xin ]. The predicted quality of oi (denoted as
Q̂(oi )) can be obtained by a function f (i.e., Q̂(oi ) = f ([xi1 , xi2 , · · ·
,xin ])). We can choose regression models [9] for defining f . For
this purpose, we can use as training set all {oj , Q̂(oj )} pairs, where
oj is an opinion posted in the past and Q̂(oj ) is the real quality of
oj . After f is trained, we can use it to estimate the quality of oi .

QUALITY ESTIMATION FOR INVESTING OPINIONS
Features

We start by exploring how well different categories of features
capture the quality of investing opinions. We consider features related to the opinion author, opinion content and the stocks the opinion talks about. Below we describe each of them in detail.
The author of an opinion is one of the main factors determining
its quality; if the author is an expert in the domain, the opinions
posted by him/her are more likely to be high quality. The most intuitive information reflecting author expertise is the performance of
opinions posted by the author in the past. Suppose we are predicting the quality of opinion o. We first extract the opinions posted
by ao (i.e., the author of o) in the past. Then, we take the average quality of opinions written by ao in the past as the first feature
describing author expertise. This feature is denoted by A_avgqual.
Moreover, we also take the percentage of high-quality opinions in
all opinions posted by ao in the past as the second feature. Specifically, we regard an opinion to be of high-quality if its quality value is larger than a threshold (e.g., 0.1). Then, the percentage of
high-quality opinions in Ou is used as another feature (denoted
by A_perchigh) in our model. Besides measuring author expertise
from his/her past opinions, we also explore additional information.
In investor-based social media, a user typically follows other users if he/she values their opinions. Thus, we use social popularity
of authors (denoted by A_social) as a third author expertise feature. We model A_social as the PageRank score [2] of the author
(i.e., a commonly used measurement for evaluating social popularity of users). The fourth feature of author expertise is the number

4.

INVESTMENT RECOMMENDATION WITH
PREDICTED OPINION QUALITIES

In our work, we utilize the predicted opinion qualities for two investment-recommendation tasks: recommending high-quality
opinions and recommending portfolios. The high-quality opinions
are selected as those with the highest predicted qualities. For generating portfolios, we use the predicted qualities of opinions to weigh
them and then aggregate the sentiment about stocks in the opinions
to generate scores for the stocks. This way, we can create daily
investment recommendations based on the posted opinions.

4.1

Quality Sensitive Sentiment Aggregation
for Recommending Portfolios

In previous work on constructing portfolios based on investor
opinions, stocks are selected according to their aggregate sentiment
indexes. One of the most popular aggregate bullish and bearish
sentiment indexes [3, 8, 5] are:




1 + |Oibe |
1 + |Oibu |
be
,
δ
=
ln
,
(2)
δibu = ln
i
1 + |Oibe |
1 + |Oibu |
where δibu (δibe ) denotes bullish (bearish) sentiment index for stock

882

(a) k=5

(b) k=10

(c) k=20

(d) k=50

(e) labels

Figure 2: Performance comparison of recommended opinions. From left to right in order, the bars correspond to the average quality
of all opinions in Od (All), the average quality of Odrec by feature A_avgqual, A_prechigh, A_social, A_onum, C_avgqual, C_prechigh,
S_avgqual, S_prechigh, and the average quality of Odrec by our regression model based on multiple features (Regression). The y-axis
shows the average value of recommended opinions’ performances (i.e., equation 4)
.
ei while Oibe (Oibe ) is the set of opinions containing bullish (bearish) views on ei . In other words, for each o in Oibu (Oibe ), the
investment views V o should contain (ei , li ) and li is bullish (bearish). Obviously, if δibu is larger than δibe (i.e., |Oibu | > |Oibe |),
we should consider to long ei while if the δibe is larger than δibu
(i.e., |Oibe | > |Oibu |), we should consider to short ei . Moreover, if
the difference between δibu and δibe (i.e., |δibu − δibe |) is larger, the
views are more consistent and the rising (if δibu > δibe ) or falling (if
δibe > δibu ) probability should also be large. Thus, for generating
a portfolio, we could sort stocks in decreasing order of |δibu − δibe |
and take the top k0 ones as the portfolio suggestion. Finally, we
long (short) the stocks if their bullish indexes are larger (smaller)
than their bearish indexes.
In our work, we attempt to utilize the predicted qualities in portfolio recommendation by giving higher weights to views in highquality opinions when we aggregate sentiment labels in opinions’ investment views. We call this quality-sensitive portfolio recommendation. Note that in Equation (2), |Oibu | actually equals
P
o∈Oibu 1. Thus, by weighting views in o with Q̂(o), the qualitysensitive aggregation for sentiment indexes should be
1 + P

1+P

o∈Oibu Q̂(o)
o∈Oibe Q̂(o)
bu
be
δi = ln
,
δ
=
ln
.
P
P
i
1 + o∈Obe Q̂(o)
1 + o∈Obu Q̂(o)
i
i
(3)

4.2

Algorithm 1 Daily Investment Recommendation
Input:
Ed = tradable stocks on day d
Od = opinions mentioning stocks in Ed and posted during from 8am on
day d − 1 to 8:00 am on day d
Output:
k recommended opinions Odrec
a portfolio Edrec ⊆ Ed consisting of k stocks
1: for all oi ∈ Od do
2: calculate the features [xi1 , xi2 , · · · , xin ]
3: estimate predicted quality Q̂(oi ) = f ([xi1 , xi2 , · · · , xin ])
4: end for
5: Odrec = k opinions in Od according to k highest Q̂(oi ) values
6: for all ei ∈ Ed do
7: calculate sentiment indexes δibu and δibe
8: calculate stock score s(ei ) = |δibu − δibe |
9: end for
10: Edrec = k0 stocks in Ed according to k0 highest stock scores

short messages (limited to 140 characters) that include ideas or
opinions on specific investments. Stock symbols in messages are
preceded by a “CashTag” ($) (as Figure 1 shows). Here, we only use of StockTwits messages have at least one CashTag. Finally,
the dataset we used contains 1,630,914 messages posted by 29,804
users and related to 5,541 stocks traded at NYSE and Nasdaq. Finally, we used the Yahoo! Finance API to crawl historical prices of
stocks, used in Equation (1) and for evaluating effectiveness.

Daily Investment Recommendation

Now, we discuss in detail how to perform opinion recommendation and portfolio recommendation on each tradable day. Thus,
our framework recommends a set of high-quality opinions before
the stock market opening time, in order for these opinions to help
users determine their trading strategy. In addition, we recommend
a set of stocks to users to trade. As a test case, in our work, we
focus on the stocks traded at New York Stock Exchange (NYSE)
and Nasdaq stock markets. The opening time of the stock markets
is 9:30 am (Eastern Standard Time). We set the time to generate
recommendations at 8:00 am. The recommendation procedure for
k opinions and k0 -stock portfolios is summarized by Algorithm 1
(assuming the recommendation is performed on day d).

5.2

Experiments on Recommending Opinions

To generate Odrec , we first predict qualities in Ed . Specifically, we train a linear regression model [6] with {opinion, quality}
pairs corresponding to the opinions posted on other days. After
the regression model is trained and the qualities of opinions in Ed
are predicted, Odrec is set as the opinions with the top k predicted
qualities.
For each Odrec , we evaluate its performance as the average quality of opinions in it:
X
1
Q(o).
(4)
rec
|Od |
rec
o∈Od

5.
5.1

EXPERIMENTS

Figure 2 presents the average performance of all Odrec s generated
on all tradable days in 2014. Besides the results corresponding to
our model (multiple features + regression, denoted by Regression,
we also show the average quality of all opinions in Ed (to see if the
average quality of Odrec is larger than it) and the results of using

Data

For experiments, we collect all messages posted in 2014 from
the investor-based social media StockTwits. StockTwits users post

883

(a) k0 =5

(b) k0 =10

(c) k0 =20

(d) k0 =50

Figure 3: Comparison of recommended portfolios obtained by
Baseline and Expert and our method (Ours). The y-axis shows
the average value of recommended portfolios’ performances
(i.e., equation 5).

Figure 4: Cumulative return with recommended portfolios (in
2014).
by the DJIA index, proving that our portfolios consisted from stocks performing better than average. Also note that the return rate
increases and that smaller values of k0 give higher return. Specifically, for k0 = 5, at the end of 2014, we could obtain a revenue of
around 30%.

each of the features alone. To test each feature alone, we generate
Odrec as opinions corresponding to k highest values based on each
single feature. As Figure 2 shows, each of the proposed features
could be used retrieve high-quality opinions to a different extent,
since the average quality of opinions in Odrec corresponding to all
features are larger than the average quality of all opinions. The
best performance is achieved by our model (multiple features +
regression).

5.3

6.

In this paper, we studied the problem of analyzing the qualities of
investor opinions posted on social media. Moreover, we explore the
use of predicted opinion qualities for opinion recommendation and
portfolio recommendation. Experiments on a real-world dataset
verify the effectiveness of our work in recommending high-quality
investment opinions and profitable portfolios.

Experiments on Recommending Portfolios

To generate Edrec , we use conventional sentiment indexes (denoted as Baseline) used in previous work [3, 8, 5] (see Equation
(2)) and our (quality-sensitive) sentiment indexes (denoted as Ours)
corresponding to Equation (3) to construct portfolios (see Section
4.1 and Algorithm 1 for details). Moreover, as another baseline, we
employ the author expertise model proposed in [1] to to generate
expert-sensitive sentiment indexes (denoted as Expert, see [1] for
details).
For evaluating Edrec , we calculate the return rate obtained if we
long the stocks for which opinions in Edrec give bullish recommendations and short the stocks for which opinions in Edrec give bearish
suggestions. Specifically, let Edrec
(Edrec
) be the stocks that attract
bu
be
bullish (bearish) ballots from opinions in Edrec . The performance
of Edrec can be evaluated as


f
c
c
f
1
|Edrec |

X

rec
e∈Ed

bu

X p (e) − p (e)
p (e) − p (e)
+
pc (e)
pc (e)
e∈E rec

,

CONCLUSIONS

7.

REFERENCES

[1] R. Bar-Haim, E. Dinur, R. Feldman, M. Fresko, and
G. Goldstein. Identifying and following expert investors in
stock microblogs. In Proceedings of the Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP), 2011.
[2] J. Heidemann, M. Klier, and F. Probst. Identifying key users in
online social networks: A pagerank based approach. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Information
Systems (ICIS), 2010.
[3] C. Oh and O. Sheng. Investigating predictive power of stock
micro blog sentiment in forecasting future stock price
directional movement. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Information Systems (ICIS), 2011.
[4] N. Oliveira, P. Cortez, and N. Areal. On the predictability of
stock market behavior using stocktwits sentiment and posting
volume. In Progress in Artificial Intelligence, pages 355–365.
Springer, 2013.
[5] T. Rao and S. Srivastava. Analyzing stock market movements
using twitter sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Advances in Social Networks
Analysis and Mining (ASONAM), 2012.
[6] G. A. Seber and A. J. Lee. Linear regression analysis, volume
936. John Wiley & Sons, 2012.
[7] W. Tu, D. Cheung, and N. Mamoulis. Improving microblog
rtrieval from exterior corpus by automatically constructing
microblogging corpus. In Proceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2015.
[8] W. Tu, D. Cheung, and N. Mamoulis. Time-sensitive opinion
mining for prediction. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2015.
[9] V. Vapnik. The nature of statistical learning theory. Springer
Science & Business Media, 2013.

(5)

dbe

Figure 3 shows the average performance of all Edrec s generated
on all tradable days in 2014. We compare the performances corresponding to our method and other competitors (i.e., Baseline and
Expert). The results show that our quality-sensitive method suggests the most profitable portfolios.
Besides, we also study the cumulative return obtained if we just
trade stocks in portfolios recommended by our method and perform
continuous trading from the beginning to the end of 2014. Specifically, from the first tradable day in 2014, we repeat the following
procedure: Suppose money for trading is available on day d. Firstly, we long stocks in Edrec
and short stocks in Edrec
for a week. After
bu
be
a week passes since day d, we sell stocks in Edrec
and
buy back the
bu
borrowed stocks in Edrec
. Thus, money for trading will be available
be
again on day d+7. In the next iteration of trading, d becomes d+7
rec
and we perform trading again according to Ed+7
. Figure 4 shows
the cumulative gain after 39 such trading sessions. Here, we also
include the cumulative return obtained if we trade on Dow Jones
Industrial Average (DJIA) index, which simulates a portfolio of 30
significant stocks traded at NYSE and Nasdaq. We can see that, the
return rates obtained by our portfolios are much higher than those

884

