"Is Sven Seven?": A Search Intent Module for Children
Nevena Dragovic

Ion Madrazo Azpiazu

Maria Soledad Pera

Computer Science Dept.
Boise State University
Boise, Idaho, USA

Computer Science Dept.
Boise State University
Boise, Idaho, USA

Computer Science Dept.
Boise State University
Boise, Idaho, USA

{nevenadragovic, ionmadrazo, solepera}@boisestate.edu

ABSTRACT

from the Web, different tools have been developed. Among
these tools, general-purpose search engines, such as Bing,
Google, and Yahoo!, are the most prominent ones, as users
of all ages turn to them on a daily basis to retrieve desired
information. As one of the largest communities that search
for online resources, children are introduced to the Web at
increasingly young ages. Trends in the U.S. indicate that
by age 5, half of all children will turn to the Web on the
daily basis, a number that increases to two-thirds by age 8
[9]. While early exposure can help them build foundational
skills vital in a knowledge-rich society, search tools were not
designed with children in mind nor do retrieved results explicitly target children, which causes many of them to fail
to complete successful searches [8]. Most engines do not explicitly support, or offer weak support, for children’s inquiry
approaches. This is important to address given that early
experiences can affect attitudes in using the Web, skill development in making adequate use of resources for personal
and educational interests, and the ability to leverage information and use it to make contributions into adulthood [14].
As described in the 2013 book, Search Engine Society,
“Children growing up in the 21st century have only ever
known a world in which search engines could be queried,
and almost always provide some kind of an answer, even if
it may not be the best one” [10]. However, like most adults,
children struggle with describing their information needs in
a concise query [6]. Moreover, they are known to sometimes use long natural language queries that can often lead
to retrieving irrelevant resources [4]. To facilitate the search
task, search engines offer query suggestions. Unfortunately,
children often bypass suggested queries altogether, which
could eliminate possible misspellings or better reflect their
information needs. Even if children, as inexperienced users,
struggle with stating the right queries to initiate successful
searches, search engines are expected to retrieve relevant information in response to their requirements. While search
intent modules have been developed to automatically generate queries that capture users’ needs [11, 12], none of these
specifically target children’s queries. With that in mind, in
this paper we introduce QuIK (Query Intended for Kids), a
simple, yet effective, search intent module tailored towards
children ages 6-15. Its goal is to transform an initial children query Q into Q0 , a query that captures the intended
meaning of Q. In accomplishing this task, we analyze the
terms in Q to: (1) distinguish misspelled terms from the
ones used by children that are not included in traditional
dictionaries, (2) identify cultural references transmitted via
mass media (children trendy terms), and (3) alter terms that

The Internet is the biggest data-sharing platform, comprised
of an immeasurable quantity of resources covering diverse
topics appealing to users of all ages. Children shape tomorrow’s society, so it is essential that this audience becomes agile with searching information. Although young users prefer
well-known search engines, their lack of skill in formulating
adequate queries and the fact that search tools were not designed explicitly with children in mind, can result in poor
outcomes. The reasons for this include children’s limited
vocabulary, which makes it challenging to articulate information needs using short queries, or their tendency to create
queries that are too long, which translates to few or irrelevant retrieved results. To enhance web search environments
in response to children’s behaviors and expectations, in this
paper we discuss an initial effort to verify well-known issues,
and identify yet to be explored ones, that affect children
in formulating (natural language or keyword) queries. We
also present a novel search intent module developed in response to these issues, which can seamlessly be integrated
with existing search engines favored by children. The proposed module interprets a child’s query and creates a shorter
and more concise query to submit to a search engine, which
can lead to a more successful search session. Initial experiments conducted using a sample of children queries validate
the correctness of the proposed search intent module.

CCS Concepts
•Information systems → Query intent; Web search engines; •Social and professional topics → Children;

Keywords
Query Intent; Children; Search engines;

1.

INTRODUCTION

The Web is an essential forum for gathering information for
different purposes. To assist end users in locating materials
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.

SIGIR ’16, July 17-21, 2016, Pisa, Italy
c 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2914738

885

could diminish the probability of a successful search session.
Thereafter, QuIK identifies representative (updated) terms
to be included in Q’ which is submitted to Google, the preferred search engine for children [1].
The novelty of the proposed module is highlighted in its
ability to modify children queries to initiate the retrieval of
kid-related materials, which can lead to improving search
engines’ performance. The design of the proposed module
explicitly considers different patterns kids use while searching the Web to adequately capture the intended meaning of
their original queries. Furthermore, the proposed module
has the ability to distinguish misspellings from terms commonly used by kids, as is the case of terms that refer to children trendy terms to which they are exposed on a daily basis
(e.g., Xbox), emphasized terms (e.g., aammaazziinngg can
indicate that something is very amazing), or diminutives
(e.g., daddy). QuIK also handles long queries or questions,
which is a must, given that children between 10 and 15 years
old represent the largest group of users who tend to create
natural language queries, some of which are in the form of
a question [7]. Furthermore, by replacing an original query
without imposing the burden on the child of analyzing the
suggestions provided by search engines’ “did you mean” feature (that eliminates misspellings from originally-submitted
queries), QuIK considers children’s habit to scroll pass the
provided suggestions, due to the lack of visual cues [4]. To
the best of our knowledge, no module that can be coupled
with existing search engines can capture search intent exclusively from children’s queries and regenerate queries on-thefly to foster the retrieval of child-friendly results.

2.

manner in which they search the Web, it is imperative to examine children query logs. Unfortunately, the Yahoo dataset
used in [7] is not publically available, while other query logs
available through Webscope1 contain only the most popular
queries among users, which do not give a real representation of child-formulated queries. Consequently, we consider
children’s search sessions extracted from the AOL query log
following the strategy in [5]. These sessions (6471 queries),
however, are outdated and lack references to trendy terms.
Knowing this limitation, we also consider an alternative to
query logs that captures recent content of interest to children and treat content (i.e., sentences) written by children as
queries. In doing so, we identify common information needs,
writing styles and issues that may influence the manner in
which queries are formulated by kids. We relied on reviews
(275004 sentences) written by elementary school-aged children archived at Spaghetti Book Club2 .
Based on the analysis of AOL and Spaghetti, we observed
that 76% and 54% of the queries contained one or more
terms3 not recognized by WordNet4 , a large lexical database
of English words. Deeper analysis allowed us to identify a
number of patterns related to the way in which children express their information needs (see Figure 1). Children are
not always proficient typists, and many look at the keyboard as they type. Unfortunately, looking down instead of
up at the screen causes them to miss search engine query
suggestions [4]. Given that misspellings negatively impact
a search session and children tend to make more spelling
mistakes than adults, correction is a must [4]. However, it is
an imperative to differentiate misspelled words from words
favored by children, including diminutives and exaggerated
words. As described in [3], “diminutives are a characteristic
of child-directed speech and diminutive suffixes are among
the first morphemes that a child acquires and uses in his/her
speech”. Exaggerated words refer to intentionally misspelled
terms to provide emphasis. Another characteristic of children search, is explicitly referencing trendy terms among
their peers. Some of those terms can be treated as misspellings by search engines (e.g., Google suggests “seven”
instead of “Sven” a character in Frozen, a popular Disney
movie) which causes poor retrieval of desired resources.
To better understand children’s information needs, QuIK
infers the search intent from a child’s query Q and automatically replaces it with a shorter, more concise query Q0 that
can lead to better search outcomes. To do so, QuIK analyzes every non-stop term t in Q to determine if it is a good
candidate to capture the intended meaning of Q and thus
should be included in Q0 . To verify if t is misspelled, QuIK
uses the popular Apache Lucene SpellChecker5 . However,
not all t0 s (not recognized by WordNet) are treated as misspellings, if t ends with a common diminutive suffix, we retrieve the root form of t by eliminates last two letters of t.
If t is an exaggerated term, then its true meaning is determined by eliminating multiple repeating characters, which
generates a new, normalized version of t. Furthermore, it is

RELATED WORK

As described by Bilal et al. [2], to adequately serve children, search engines must address the fact that children are
seldom successful in formulating succinct queries. In fact,
researchers have observed that children tend to use long
(natural language) queries, as opposed to keyword queries,
when performing a web search [4]. Unfortunately, the longer
the query, the less likely a web search engine can retrieve
relevant resources in response [4] to it, which can be very
frustrated for them. Search intent can help capture users’
information needs by understanding the purpose behind the
used words, which is important not only for children, but
for all groups of users with a web search issue.
A number of studies [11, 12, 15] address the issue of search
intent. Their strategies focus on: creating a hierarchical taxonomy using a tree to find representations of generic intents
from user queries [15], examining bias between users’ search
intent and the query generated in each search session [11],
or investigating query intent when users search for cognitive characteristics in documents [12]. Mentioned strategies, however, fail to specifically consider issues pertaining
directly to children, which demonstrates a clear need for
new modules that automatically create queries on their behalf. QuIK simultaneously addresses misspellings, queries
with terms that children use but that are harder to match
by search engines, purposely emphasized terms, and trendy
topics that are more popular among children than among
adults. Such topics are yet to be addressed in the literature.

3.

1

https://webscope.sandbox.yahoo.com/
https://wordnet.princeton.edu/
3
For practical reasons, stopwords in AOL and Spaghetti
were removed, terms were lemmatized and URLs were ignored, since search engines adequately handle queries including the names of popular sites.
4
http://www.spaghettibookclub.org/
5
https://lucene.apache.org/
2

QUIK, A SEARCH INTENT MODULE

To understand children’s writing patterns along with the

886

Figure 1: Writing patterns observed on AOL and Spaghetti data sources
where C represents a collection of documents of size |C|, d
is a document in C, |d| is the number of words in d, and
f reqt,d represents frequency of occurrence of t in d.
In creating Q0 , QuIK gives priority to children trendy
terms in order to better understand the search intent. The
rest of the terms to be included in Q0 are the terms in Q
that yield the highest RepScore(t). Lastly, Q0 is submitted
to Google to initiate a search on behalf of a child for Q.

very important to capture trendy terms and enable QuIK
to understand their significance and provide relevant results
for children. Hence, QuIK considers existing categories on
well-known websites with children content (e.g., Amazon6
and Common Sense Media7 ) to determine if a t is misspelled
or if it is in fact a trendy, child-related term. We cannot
assume that kids will use only child-friendly vocabulary in
formulating Q. To address this issue, we study term associations and consider terms related to the ones in Q that can
steer the search towards retrieving child-related resources.
For example, a query that uses the term doctor instead of
surgeon is better tailored towards the retrieval of suitable
children content, since the former is a simpler term. To precisely understand the complexity of terms used in queries,
we created a children’s dictionary CD. CD includes close
to 100,000 lemmatized, non-stop words, extracted from texts
retrieved from a sample of various children-related websites
(where content is written for and by children), such as Long
Long Time Ago, KidPub and Teenreads. If t is contained in
CD, then QuIK treats it as child-related, otherwise it turns
to WordNet to find a more suitable term by selecting one of
t0 hypernyms and use it instead of t8 .
After each t in Q has been updated based on the identified
patterns, if needed, or recognized as a trendy term, QuIK
proceeds to create a new, “cleaner” version of Q. Given the
results from previous studies, we know that general audiences use just 2.3 words on average for a query generation
[13], while the number increases to 3.8 when considering
children [5]. For this reason, QuIK uses the 3 most representative terms to correctly capture the information need
expressed in Q. To quantify the degree to which each nontrendy term t in Q expresses children’s information need,
we calculate a score for t using the content retrieved from
children-related sites (used in the creation of the children
dictionary), as shown in Equation 1.
P
RepScore(t) =

d∈C

f reqt,d
|d|

|C|

4.

QUIK IN ACTION

We applied QuIK on 55000 queries from Spaghetti (created
as discussed in Section 3 and disjoint from the set of queries
used for development purposes) and observed that the number of queries with one or more words non-recognized by
WordNet decreased from 16% to 2.3%. At the same time, we
submitted sampled children queries to Google that included
a number of the aforementioned identified patterns. We observed that when submitting queries including exaggerated
and trendy terms, Google retrieves no results (see Figure
2). Furthermore, after submitting “sven movie”, Google provided suggestions such as “seven movie online”, “seven movie
ending”, “seven movie deaths” and “seven movie trailer”. As
we can see, none of these suggestions is kid-related, and obviously does not pertain to the popular Disney movie Frozen.
These examples provide further evidence on the need for
modules such as QuIK, which are tailored towards satisfying children’s needs.

Figure 2: Screen capture of Google in response to
the query “Sven is a raindeeeer character movie”

(1)

5.

6

http://www.amazon.com/
https://www.commonsensemedia.org/
8
If the returned term does not belong to CD, then t remains
unchanged.
7

INITIAL ASSESSMENT

We conducted an initial assessment to evaluate both (i) the
quality of the updated queries generated by QuIK given an
initial child-formulated query and (ii) the degree to which

887

QuIK-generated queries influence the retrieval of documents
relevant to children. Due to the lack of benchmark datasets,
we created a survey in which, for a given child-generated
query CQ, we asked appraisers to (1) choose the query reformulation that best captures the intended meaning of CQ
and (2) choose the document that is the most relevant given
CQ. Among the provided query reformulations, we included
(in random order) the QuIK-generated query for CQ as
well as two query suggestions provided by Google9 for CQ.
Similarly, among the provided results, we included (in random order) the top-two ones retrieved using CQ as well as
the top-retrieved one using QuIK-generated query for CQ.
We asked 25 elementary-school educators to complete the
surveys using a small sample of children queries (including
“Sven is a reindeer character in a movie” and “how does the
baby kengaroos stay inside the pouch”10 ).
Based on the collected evaluations (the results of which
are summarized in Table 1), we observed that in 59% of
the responses, queries generated by QuiK were selected as
the ones that best capture the intended meaning of a given
children query. Moreover, 88% of the responses indicated
that QuIK-generated queries lead to the retrieval of relevant
resources, as opposed to resources retrieved by Google in
response to the original given query.

Favored search intent
Favored relevant resources

QuIK
0.59
0.88

ambiguity of users’ search intent during a session. This is
important given that the same query may target different
information for different users. As mentioned in Section 5,
further assessment is a must. We plan on conducting online
evaluations with a greater number of appraisers (including
teachers and children) complemented with measuring the effect of performance of search engines coupled with QuIK to
enhance Web search environment.

7.

Google
0.41
0.12

Table 1: Initial assessment of QuIK

6.

REFERENCES

[1] D. Bilal. Ranking, relevance judgment, and precision
of information retrieval on children’s queries:
Evaluation of google, yahoo!, bing, yahoo! kids, and
ask kids. JASIST, 63(9):1879–1896, 2012.
[2] D. Bilal and R. Ellis. Evaluating leading web search
engines on children’s queries. In Human-Computer
Interaction. Users and Applications, pages 549–558.
Springer, 2011.
[3] I. Dabasinškienž. Intimacy, familiarity and formality:
Diminutives in modern lithuanian. Lituanus, 55(1),
2009.
[4] A. Druin, E. Foss, L. Hatley, E. Golub, M. L. Guha,
J. Fails, and H. Hutchinson. How children search the
internet with keyword interfaces. In IDC, pages 89–96,
2009.
[5] S. Duarte Torres, D. Hiemstra, and P. Serdyukov.
Query log analysis in the context of information
retrieval for children. In ACM SIGIR, pages 847–848,
2010.
[6] S. Duarte Torres, D. Hiemstra, I. Weber, and
P. Serdyukov. Query recommendation for children. In
ACM CIKM, pages 2010–2014, 2012.
[7] S. Duarte Torres, I. Weber, and D. Hiemstra. Analysis
of search and browsing behavior of young users on the
web. ACM TWEB, 8(2):7, 2014.
[8] E. Foss, A. Druin, R. Brewer, P. Lo, L. Sanchez,
E. Golub, and H. Hutchinson. Children’s search roles
at home: Implications for designers, researchers,
educators, and parents. JASIST, 63(3):558–573, 2012.
[9] A. L. Gutnick, M. Robb, L. Takeuchi, J. Kotler,
L. Bernstein, and M. Levine. Always connected: The
new digital media habits of young children. Joan Ganz
Cooney Center at Sesame Workshop, 2011.
[10] A. Halavais. Search engine society. John Wiley &
Sons, 2013.
[11] B. Hu, Y. Zhang, W. Chen, G. Wang, and Q. Yang.
Characterizing search intent diversity into click
models. In WWW, pages 17–26, 2011.
[12] M. P. Kato, T. Yamamoto, H. Ohshima, and
K. Tanaka. Investigating users’ query formulations for
cognitive search intents. In ACM SIGIR, pages
577–586, 2014.
[13] T. Lau and E. Horvitz. Patterns of search: analyzing
and modeling web query refinement. Springer, 1999.
[14] N. Vanderschantz, A. Hinze, and S. J. Cunningham.
“sometimes the internet reads the question wrong”:
Children’s search strategies & difficulties. Am. Soc.
Info. Sci. Tech., 51(1):1–10, 2014.
[15] X. Yin and S. Shah. Building taxonomy of web search
intents for name entity queries. In WWW, pages
1001–1010, 2010.

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

We discussed an initial analysis conducted to identify common struggles children face when expressing information
needs while searching the Web. Knowing that children represent a large group of online users, and the importance
that search outcomes have on their development, it is crucial to provide more attention to this task. While a number
of studies identify issues and flaws of search engines while
interacting with young users, very few research works explicitly focus on solving these problem, which is why research
pertaining towards search intent modules tailored for this
group is a must. QuIK simultaneously considers newly discovered and well-known patterns identified in queries created
by children, and creates queries that capture the information
needs meant to be expressed by children.
Our discussed efforts represent the groundwork of an indepth research. We plan to extend initial work by analyzing
children query logs, and simultaneously addressing new (and
already identified) issues pertaining to children querying to
further enhance the design of proposed search intent module. A limitation of QuIK is not considering extremely short
queries often generated by young users. This is sometimes
insufficient to retrieve needed information and as such creates more opportunity for improvement for QuIK. Another
opportunity for QuIK 0 s enhancement is understanding the
9
We consider Google for comparison purposes, since, as previously stated, is the search engine of choice for children.
10
Any misspelled terms included in the queries provided in
the survey were reproduced as per the original children
queries.

888

