Jointly Modeling Review Content and Aspect Ratings
for Review Rating Prediction
Zhipeng Jin1,2, Qiudan Li1, Daniel D. Zeng1,2,3, YongCheng Zhan3, Ruoran Liu1,2, Lei Wang1, Hongyuan Ma4
1 The

State Key Laboratory of Management and Control for Complex Systems,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3 Department of Management Information Systems, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, USA
4 CNCERT/CC, Beijing, China

{jinzhipeng2013, qiudan.li, dajun.zeng, liuruoran2016, l.wang}@ia.ac.cn,
yongchengzhan@email.arizona.edu, mahongyuan@foxmail.com
Review content and aspect rating play important roles in
predicting review ratings[3,4], where the former includes the
semantics and users’ opinion and sentiment, and the latter reflects
users’ feelings on more specific aspects of a product. [5] used a
linear regression to learn the user’s specific aspect preference
extracted from the review content, and predicted the overall
review rating. [1] improved the accuracy of rating prediction
using feature words extracted from customer reviews to reduce
the dimension of the feature vector. These methods work well
when aspect-opinion pairs can be accurately extracted from
review texts and aspect ratings are complete. However, this is
often difficult to implement by relying only on natural language
processing techniques or other corpora such as WordNet[1].
Furthermore, in a real scenario, aspect ratings are optional for
users, the incomplete aspect ratings will reduce prediction
accuracy. To solve these problems, in this paper we propose a
novel method for review rating prediction.
Recently, deep learning has been a hot research topic and
successfully applied to sentiment analysis and natural language
processing. The key aspect of deep learning is that it
automatically learns features from raw data using a generalpurpose learning procedure, instead of designing features by
human engineers[6] . The characteristics of requiring very little
engineering by hand makes it easily discover interesting patterns
from large-scale social media data. [7] proposed a model, called
skip-thought vectors, for learning high-quality sentence vectors
without a particular supervised task in mind. The model abstracts
the skip-gram model of words to the sentence level, and encodes a
sentence to predict the sentences around it. Inspired by the good
idea, our key idea is to adopt skip-thought vectors to learn the
representation of review content, where review contents with
similar semantics and sentiment will have similar vector
representations. The novel vector representation of review
encodes deep semantics and sentiment, thus will help improve the
prediction accuracy. Then, we hypothesize that users’ history
reviewing behaviors of aspect rating can be explored and propose
a novel model to alleviate data missing of aspect ratings. Finally,
the obtained vector representation of review content and the dense
aspect ratings are integrated into a unified optimization
framework to predict the overall review rating.

ABSTRACT
Review rating prediction is of much importance for sentiment
analysis and business intelligence. Existing methods work well
when aspect-opinion pairs can be accurately extracted from
review texts and aspect ratings are complete. The challenges of
improving prediction accuracy are how to capture the semantics
of review content and how to fill in the missing values of aspect
ratings. In this paper, we propose a novel review rating prediction
method, which improves the prediction accuracy by capturing
deep semantics of review content and alleviating data missing
problem of aspect ratings. The method firstly learns the latent
vector representation of review content using skip-thought vectors,
a state-of-the-art deep learning method, then, the missing values
of aspect ratings are filled in based on users’ history reviewing
behaviors, finally, a novel optimization framework is proposed to
predict the review rating. Experimental results on two real-world
datasets demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed method.

General Terms
Algorithms, Design, Experimentation

Keywords
Review Rating Prediction; Skip-thought Vectors; Aspect Rating;
Data Missing

1. INTRODUCTION
With the rapid development of e-commerce, abundant product
reviews available on the Web have become a valuable source for
consumers and organizations. Given a dataset of customer reviews,
rating predictors can learn and predict the rating of a target
product by a customer[1]. Horrigan[2] pointed out that consumers
are willing to pay from 20% to 99% more to buy a product whose
rating is 5-star than 4-star. Companies have more fine-grained
requirements for keeping track of product quality. Therefore,
review rating prediction is of much importance for sentiment
analysis and business intelligence, because it enables the market
to estimate how satisfied a customer will be with a product.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request
permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR '16, July 17-21, 2016, Pisa, Italy.
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07…$15.00.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2914692

2. METHOD
Figure 1 depicts the proposed method of review rating
prediction. It consists of three modules: learning latent vector
representation for review content, alleviating the missing values
of aspect ratings with users’ rating preference and predicting the
overall rating in an optimization framework.
Learning latent vector representation for review content
The skip-thoughts [7] is adopted to learn the representation of

893

minimize the L2-regularized square error with SGD：
Aspects rating

Overall rating

,
Review content

Review content vector
generation



Asp_1 Asp_2 … Asp_K
1
…
2

3

…

2

…

…

…

…

5

…


Users’ rating
preference learning

Aspects representation

…

sN

x1

…

Sentence vector

xk

p1

… pk
User preference

Aspects

Figure 1. System architecture of the proposed model
review content. The model uses an RNN(Recurrent Neural
Network) encoder to map words sequence to a sentence vector
and an RNN decoder to generate the surrounding sentences. Given
, ,
), let
denote the t-th word in
a sentence tuple (
sentence , ℎ denote the encoder output of . Then, the model
aims to maximize the following objective function:
(

|

,ℎ ) +

(

|

(

+

(

←

+ γ(

,

,

,ℎ )

and

+

)+

←

+γ



←

+γ



←

+ γ(

)

−
−

iff

>0

−
−λ



)

PredictMean: This method simply uses the mean value of
the ratings in the training set to predict rating.

BoW(Bag-of-words): This method is a traditional
representation method for documents, where unigrams and
bigrams are used to represent a document.

ParagraphVector[9]: This method learns the paragraph
representations by predicting the surrounding words in
contexts sampled from the paragraph. We utilize this
unsupervised learning algorithm to represent each review
content by a dense vector.

Aspects: this method takes normalized aspect ratings as
features to predict the overall rating directly.
The methods of BoW, ParagraphVector and Aspects map
each review to different feature spaces. We then predict the

)+

To optimize the model parameters

+

To validate the performance of our review rating prediction
model, we build two datasets from product review website
JuiceDB1 and service review website TripAdvisor2 respectively.
JuiceDB: this website provides a very interesting review
service for e-cigarettes, we use API to collect e-liquid reviews
from June 2013 to November 2015. The dataset contains 14737
reviews for 4813 e-liquid products, each review is accompanied
by an overall rating and a set of four aspect ratings of an e-liquid,
each on a scale of 1-5: flavor accuracy, throat hit, value and cloud
production. 25% of the reviews have incomplete aspect ratings.
TripAdvisor: this website provides reviews of travel-related
content such as tourist attractions, hotels and restaurants. We use
API to collect reviews about restaurants in New York from
January 2015 to December 2015. The dataset contains 14524
reviews for 117 restaurants. Besides the overall rating, each
review has three aspect ratings on a scale of 1-5: food, service,
value. 38.3% of the reviews have incomplete aspect ratings.
We randomly partition the data into 75% for training and 25%
for testing, repeat this process 5 times and present the averages.
For the vector representation of review content, we use a 4800
dimensional vector, according to [7], it is formed by a
unidirectional encoder with 2400 dimensions and a bidirectional
encoder with another 2400 dimensions.
We compare our method against the following four baselines:

Filling in the missing values of aspect ratings The aspect
ratings are important features for overall rating. For aspects set
are
[ , , … , ] , the normalized aspect ratings of user
represented as[ , , … , ], where k is the number of aspects
and ∗ is set to be 0 if the aspect rating is missing. The missing
values of aspect ratings will result in prediction bias. Generally,
random value or mean constant cannot accurately predict the
missing values[8]. As shown in[5], users have different
preferences on different aspects. Some users are harsh on specific
aspect thus give lower ratings while others tend to be tolerant with
minor flaws and give relatively higher ratings. Therefore, we
propose to learn user’s aspect rating preference based on his/her
history reviewing behavior to handle the missing values problem.
A user preference matrix P ∈ R × is constructed, where m is the
denotes the user ’s preference
number of users, each element
on aspect . The element of the matrix is automatically learnt
during the process of predicting the overall ratings, which is
explained in detail in the next step.
Predicting the overall rating Based on the above analysis, the
overall rating is highly related to three key factors: semantics of
review content , aspect ratings with missing values and user
preference, therefore, the overall rating of user for one product
is predicted as follows:
+

− ̂ ) +

3. EXPERIMENTS
3.1 Dataset and Baseline Methods

Where
,ℎ
,
(
|
, ℎ ) denote the
probabilities of the t-th word for forward and backward sentences
,
given the previous t-1 words and the encoder
representation ℎ . The RNN structure can take any length of
sentence as input, we thus employ the learnt encoder in [7] as a
feature extractor to encode the review contents, then each review
content is represented as a n-dimension vector ∈ R .

̂ =

(

Where γ is the learning rate ， λ , λ are regularization
parameters. It should be noted that the second rule explains the
learning process of user preference matrix.
> 0 indicates that
the specific aspect rating is valid, thus we update
to mine the
underlying preference.

Rating Prediction

s1

, ,

For each given rating , prediction error is denoted as e =
− ̂ ，then the parameters are updated as follows:

Alleviating the missing values with
user preference

Skip-thought vector

min

， we

894

1

https://www.juicedb.com/

2

https://www.tripadvisor.com/

review ratings in a unified regression framework with these
different feature representations.

average. This implies that the deep semantics of review content
can be captured by skip-thought vectors, moreover, the learnt user
preference matrix based on the users’ history reviewing behaviors
is more reliable, thus solving the missing data problem of aspect
ratings and improving the performance of overall rating prediction.

3.2 Results and Discussions
To evaluate the accuracy of the method, we adopt mean
absolute error (MAE) measure and coefficient of determination
( ) measure:
MAE =
=1−

1
∑
∑

|

− ̂ |

(
(

− ̂ )
− )

3.2.2 Review Rating Prediction in TripAdvisor
Table 2 shows the comparison results of different methods in
TripAdvisor. We set γ, λ , λ to 0.001, 0.0005, 0.01 in this
experiment empirically.
 Rate Prediction using only review content or aspect ratings
From Part 1, it can be observed that compared with
PredictMean, all the other learning methods achieve significant
improvements and Skip still has the best performance in both
MAE and R . The good performance in both two datasets further
indicates that Skip-thoughts model is robust to mine the semantic
representations of review contents and predict the ratings.
Table 2. The comparison results in TripAdvisor

denotes the average
Where M is the number of samples,
value of true ratings. MAE reflects the average difference between
the predicted rating and the true rating, reflects how much of
the total variance is captured by the model. The comparison
results of different methods on two datasets are shown below in
Table 1 and Table 2 respectively in which Skip is short for Skipthoughts , Aspects* refers to aspect ratings with user preference.

3.2.1 Review Rating Prediction in JuiceDB
Table 1 shows the performance comparison of different
methods in JuiceDB. We empirically set γ, λ , λ to 0.001, 0.0005,
0.01in this experiment.

Part 1

Table 1. The comparison results in JuiceDB
Method

Part 1

Part 2
Part 3

MAE

R

PredictMean

0.778

0.000

BoW

0.645

0.322

ParagraphVector

0.696

0.190

Aspects

0.659

0.291

Skip

0.597

0.416

BoW +Aspects

0.616

0.386

ParagraphVector +Aspects

0.603

0.412

Skip +Aspects

0.548

0.512

Skip +Aspects*

0.517

0.555

Part 2
Part 3

Method

MAE

R

PredictMean

0.614

0.000

BoW

0.535

0.165

ParagraphVector

0.535

0.153

Aspects

0.588

0.043

Skip

0.477

0.322

BoW +Aspects

0.531

0.187

Paragraph Vector +Aspects

0.522

0.191

Skip +Aspects

0.473

0.344

Skip +Aspects*

0.476

0.308

 Rate Prediction using both review content and aspect ratings
We further combine the review content representation and the
aspect ratings to predict the overall rating. From Part 2 and Part 3
in Table 2, we can observe that the three combination ways all
achieve better results than methods considering only one factor in
Part 1. “Skip+Aspects” obtains the best results in both measures.
This further implies that deep semantics of review content and
aspects ratings do play important roles in review rating prediction.
It can be seen from the results in JuiceDB and TripAdvisor that
“Skip+Aspects*” works better than “Skip+Aspects” in the former
data set, which has less incomplete aspect ratings. The reason may
be that a larger percentage of missing aspect ratings on
TripAdvisor makes it difficult for Skip+Aspects* to learn user
preference from users’ history reviewing behaviors.

 Rate Prediction using only review content or aspect ratings
We first study the prediction effects of different methods using
only review content or aspect ratings. It can be observed from part
1 that all these methods perform better than PredictMean which
indicates the importance of both review content and aspect ratings.
Skip-thoughts model achieves the best performance in terms of
both MAE and R . Results of Aspects is relatively poor due to the
high percentage(25%) of incomplete aspect ratings. Compared
with Aspects, better results of Skip-thoughts indicate that accurate
semantic representation of review content has more impact than
aspect ratings in overall rating prediction.

3.2.3 Case Study
The above experiments in JuiceDB and TripAdvisor have
demonstrated the effectiveness of our proposed model. Specially,
learning semantic representations of review content using skipthought vectors and filling in missing values of aspect ratings
show advantages on improving the accuracy of rating prediction.
To give deep insights into the proposed model, we illustrate these
two aspects by using intuitive examples in detail.
Firstly, we select some seed reviews and calculate their similar
reviews using cosine similarity based on the skip-thought vectors.
The results are shown in Table 3 and Table 4. For each seed
review, we represent two similar reviews along with their
similarities.
In Table 3, we represent one seed review with negative
sentiment from JuiceDB. Both the similar reviews are negative
and contain negative words like “horrible”, “bad”, “nauseous”

 Rate Prediction using both review content and aspect ratings
The above experimental results enlighten us to combine both of
aspect ratings and review content for overall rating prediction.
Results in Part 2 of Table1 demonstrate the effectiveness of the
combination and “Skip+Aspects” achieves better performance
than the other two. Furthermore, by filling in the missing values
of aspect ratings using the learnt user preference matrix, the
proposed “Skip+Aspects*” in Part3 that integrates vector
representation of review content by skip-thought vectors and
aspect ratings achieves the best performance. Our final model can
predict a user’s review rating of a product with MAE 0.517 on

895

which are synonyms to “awful” in the seed. Table 4 presents one
the aspects in the same way: value, food, service. We can observe
positive seed review from TripAdvisor. The similar reviews
that value and food are two factors people care most when they
choose a restaurant. Moreover, by incorporating users’ aspect
include similar expressions such as “would definitely return”,“will
rating preferences, our final model predicts the overall rating more
definitely return”. Besides, the similar reviews contain some
positive words like “great”, “good”, “excellent”, “helpful” to
accurately. For example, in the test stage in JuiceDB, a user rates
express compliments about the experience. The above examples
one e-liquid with 3 stars. The “Skip+Aspects” method can predict
show that without feature engineering, the skip-thought vector is
it with a score of 2.86. But by utilizing the user’s learnt preference
capable of mapping reviews with similar sentiment and semantics
vector [0.387 0.305 -1.44 0.385], our final model “Skip+Aspects*”
into similar vector representations successfully. This verifies the
can predict the rating with a score of 2.95 which further illustrate
the effectiveness of the preference matrix.
advantage of skip-thought vectors over other representation
methods.
Take JuiceDB for an example, it could serve as an early
Secondly, aspects features are also of importance to the overall
warning on the use patterns of e-liquid. Policy makers of FDA
review rating prediction. By observing the weights of the aspect
(Food and Drug Administration) could make use of the predicted
features from the trained model, we can have a fine-grained
ratings and similar sentiments to identify e-liquids that are
analysis of the aspects. In JuiceDB, aspects are ranked in terms of
potentially harmful and addicting. For example, e-liquids that are
weights: flavor accuracy, value, throat hit, cloud production.
found to hurt users’ throat, make users feel bad in some way or
significantly make users want to use more, could in turn inform
Flavor accuracy and value are the two most important factors
when users evaluate one e-liquid product. In TripAdvisor, we rank
the development and implementation of new regulations or laws.
Table 3. The similar reviews mined by Skip-thought vectors in JuiceDB
review content
similarity
Awful. Just awful.
horrible. imagine an ashtray with cloves...just bad.
0.746
similar reviews
Pretty bad. Can't even vape it without feeling nauseous.
0.714
Table 4. The similar reviews mined by Skip-thought vectors in TripAdvisor
review content
similarity
Really enjoyed our pizza, which was huge. The service was quick, efficient and really
seed review 2
friendly. Was very good value for money, will definitely return.
We went here for the prix fixe lunch which was very reasonable - all the food was great and
0.839
really good service - would definitely return.
similar reviews
A special restaurant for celebrations. Portions are very ample. Quality of food excellent. We
split an appetizer and salad and thought it was a full order. The staff was attentive and
0.832
extremely helpful. Would definitely return.
[2] Horrigan, J.A., 2008. Online shopping. Pew Internet &
4. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
American Life Project Report.
In this paper, we proposed a novel review rating prediction
[3] Ganu, G., Elhadad, N., and Marian, A., 2009. Beyond the
method. Experimental results show that high-quality
Stars: Improving Rating Predictions using Review Text
representation of review content and complete aspect ratings play
Content. In WebDB. Citeseer, 1-6.
important roles in improving prediction accuracy. This work is a
[4] Diao, Q., Qiu, M., Wu, C.-Y., Smola, A.J., Jiang, J., and
first step towards learning deep semantics of review content using
Wang, C., 2014. Jointly modeling aspects, ratings and
skip-thought vectors in review rating prediction. The framework
sentiments for movie recommendation (JMARS). In
can integrate other information such as reviewer’s information,
Proceedings of the 20th ACM SIGKDD international
product information, etc. in the future. It will also be very
conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining. ACM,
interesting to apply the method to analyze users’ detail experience
193-202.
and how producers and marketers use social media to promote and
[5] Mukherjee, S., Basu, G., and Joshi, S., 2013. Incorporating
sell various products or service, which could provide valuable
author preference in sentiment rating prediction of reviews.
information for regulatory decision-makers.
In Proceedings of the 22nd international conference on
World Wide Web companion. International World Wide Web
5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Conferences Steering Committee, 47-48.
This research is supported by the NNSFC projects (No.
[6] Lecun, Y., Bengio, Y., and Hinton, G., 2015. Deep learning.
61172106, 91224008, 61402123, 71472175) and Important
Nature. 521, 7553, 436-444. DOI=
National Science & Technology Specific Project (No.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature14539.
2013ZX10004218).
[7] Kiros, R., Zhu, Y., Salakhutdinov, R.R., Zemel, R., Urtasun,
R., Torralba, A., and Fidler, S., 2015. Skip-thought vectors.
6. REFERENCES
In Advances in neural information processing systems, 3276[1] Ochi, M., Okabe, M., and Onai, R., 2011. Rating prediction
3284.
using feature words extracted from customer reviews. In
[8] Soley-Bori, M., 2013. Dealing with missing data: Key
Proceedings of the 34th international ACM SIGIR conference
assumptions and methods for applied analysis. Boston
on Research and development in Information Retrieval.
University.
ACM, 1205-1206.
[9] Le, Q.V. and Mikolov, T., 2014. Distributed representations
of sentences and documents. In Proceedings of the
international conference on machine learning(ICML).
seed review 1

896

