On Information-Theoretic Document-Person
Associations for Expert Search in Academia
Vitor Mangaravite
mangaravite@dcc.ufmg.br

Rodrygo L. T. Santos
rodrygo@dcc.ufmg.br

Department of Computer Science
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais
Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil

ABSTRACT

been proposed that attempt to model the expertise of candidate persons and their relevance given a user’s query (e.g.,
[3, 12, 15]). In common, all of these approaches rely on some
form of association between people and documents in order
to model the expertise profile of each candidate [7].
Document-person associations are commonly modeled as
boolean variables, indicating whether or not a person has
authored or is mentioned in a document. Given the ambiguous nature of such associations in typical enterprise collections [1, 10], attempts to model non-boolean associations
have been made that reflect the confidence that the right
person has been identified (e.g., based upon the frequency
of occurrence of the person’s name in the document [6] or
its occurrence in proximity to the query terms [20]). In addition, to limit the impact of false positives, the inferred
associations are typically normalized to penalize prolific authorships. In contrast, many other expert search scenarios
provide unambiguous associations, such as email-sender in
email corpora [5] and paper-author in academic corpora [4,
11], which preclude the need for authorship inference.
In this paper, we address expert search in academia. In
this scenario, the authorship of a document can be determined with reasonable certainty, by leveraging metadata associated with individual publication records. As a result,
rather than attempting to infer the authorship of a document, we propose to model associations as non-boolean
variables reflecting the probability that the document is informative of the expertise of a candidate. Moreover, because
authorships in this scenario are unambiguous, penalizing
documents with many associated authors or authors with
many associated documents becomes arguably counterintuitive. Therefore, we further introduce an alternative normalization scheme that measures how discriminative a particular document-person association is in light of all associations involving either the document or the person. Through
a large-scale user study with academic experts from several
areas of knowledge, we demonstrate the suitability of the
proposed association and normalization models to improve
the effectiveness of a state-of-the-art expert search approach.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to
infer the strength of document-person associations beyond
authorship attribution for expert search in academia.
In the remainder of this paper, Section 2 discusses related
work on expert search and association models. Section 3
introduces our information-theoretic models for weighting
document-person associations. Section 4 describes the setup
and the results of the empirical evaluation of our proposed
models. Finally, Section 5 presents our conclusions.

State-of-the-art expert search approaches rely on documentperson associations to infer the expertise of a candidate person for a given query. Such associations have traditionally
been modeled as boolean variables, indicating whether or
not a candidate authored a document, and further normalized to penalize prolific authorships. In this paper, we address expert search in academia, where the authorship of
a document can be determined with reasonable certainty.
In contrast to traditional approaches, we propose to model
associations as non-boolean variables, reflecting the probability that a document is informative of the expertise of a
candidate. Moreover, we introduce an alternative normalization scheme that measures how discriminative a particular
document-person association is in light of all associations involving either the document or the person. Through a largescale user study with academic experts from several areas of
knowledge, we demonstrate the suitability of the proposed
association and normalization schemes to improve the effectiveness of a state-of-the-art expert search approach.

CCS Concepts
•Information systems → Expert search;

Keywords
Academic search; expertise retrieval

1.

INTRODUCTION

Users search for an expert whenever they need proficient
knowledge on a given topic [7]. For instance, an expert on
“information retrieval ” could be searched for providing consultancy or for being recruited by a search company. Expert
search has received considerable attention from the information retrieval community over the past decade, with a particular focus on finding experts within an enterprise organization [2, 8, 10, 19]. Several expert search approaches have
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.

SIGIR ’16, July 17–21, 2016, Pisa, Italy.
c 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2914751

925

2.

RELATED WORK

the sum of the weights of all associations related to the document or the candidate, respectively. Normalizing associations may be useful even for non-probabilistic approaches, to
counter the noise introduced by spurious associations resulting from false-positive authorship attributions. With this in
mind, Macdonald and Ounis [16] proposed to normalize associations by the length of the candidate’s profile, measured
in either number of terms or number of documents. Given
the absence of spurious associations in our scenario, we propose a normalization scheme that does not penalize prolific
candidates, but instead measures how discriminative each
association is for each document or candidate. The normalization schemes of Balog et al. [3] and Macdonald and
Ounis [16] are used as baselines in our investigation.

Expert search has been the subject of intense research over
the past decade, particularly with the introduction of an expert search task at the TREC 2005 Enterprise track [10].
For instance, Balog et al. [3] introduced two alternative generative probabilistic approaches for expert search, which estimate the likelihood that a given query is generated by each
candidate expert. Their Model 1 performs this estimation
directly, by relying on the candidate’s language model built
from his or her associated documents. In turn, their Model 2
assumes a generative process in which candidates generate
documents, which themselves generate the query. Discriminative probabilistic models have also been proposed, which
attempt to estimate the relevance of a given query-candidate
pair directly from training data [12]. Other prominent approaches include graph-based models [18], which perform
inference on an expertise graph built from document-person
associations, and voting models [15], which aggregate the
query-biased document relevance estimates into relevance
estimates for the associated candidate experts.
A common characteristic of most existing expert search
approaches is their reliance on document-person associations. In particular, almost all approaches consider boolean
associations, indicating whether or not a candidate has authored a particular document. However, in a typical enterprise setting, document-person associations can be ambiguous. For instance, candidate names may be mentioned
in different parts of a meeting minute without any explicit
authorship indication. To overcome such an ambiguity, nonboolean association models have been proposed to estimate
the confidence that the correct candidate has been identified. For instance, Balog and de Rijke [6] proposed to weight
document-person associations based on the Kullback-Leibler
divergence between the document and the candidate’s language models built using only the candidate’s name. Other
association models also estimated the distance between the
candidate’s name and the query terms to improve the identification of authorships related to the query topic [20].
In contrast to the aforementioned approaches, we tackle
expert search in academia, a domain where authorships can
be determined with reasonable certainty via publication metadata records uniquely associated with each candidate. As a
result, we propose to model associations as non-boolean variables aimed to convey the informativeness of each document
for the expertise profile of a candidate. In a similar spirit,
Macdonald and Ounis [14] proposed to estimate the extent
to which a document is related to the core interests of each
candidate associated with it. To this end, they clustered
each candidate’s profile and ranked the resulting clusters in
decreasing order of their size, weighting a document-person
association by the inverse of the rank of the cluster that
contained the document. Our proposed approach is simpler, and relies on a standard information-theoretic measure
of the informativeness of the document for the candidate’s
expertise. The cluster-based approach of Macdonald and
Ounis [14] is included as a baseline in our experiments.
Another aspect of document-person associations that is
relevant to our proposal is normalization. For instance, both
generative models proposed by Balog et al. [3] rely on a
normalization component to estimate the probability p(d|e)
that document d is associated with candidate e. This estimation can be either document- or candidate-centric, depending on whether the association weight is normalized by

3. INFORMATION-THEORETIC
DOCUMENT-PERSON ASSOCIATIONS
A key element of any expert search approach is its ability to represent the expertise of each candidate expert. As
discussed in the previous sections, most expert search approaches in the literature rely on explicit document-person
associations to model a candidate’s expertise profile. Without loss of generality, we can formalize the association f (d, e)
between document d and candidate e according to:
f (d, e) = ψ(ρ(d, e)),

(1)

where ρ(d, e) and ψ(•) denote association and normalization schemes for the association between document d and
candidate e, respectively. The majority of the expert search
approaches in the literature rely on a boolean association
scheme, which assigns a constant value ρ(d, e) = 1 for all
existing associations. In turn, the most straightforward normalization scheme simply divides the association ρ(d, e) by
the sum ofP
all document or candidate
Passociations, such that
ψ(•) ≡ •/ e′ ρ(d, e′ ) or ψ(•) ≡ •/ d′ ρ(d′ , e) [3].
In the following, we introduce novel information-theoretic
association and normalization schemes for expert search in
academia. The proposed schemes exploit the unambiguous
nature of document-person associations leveraged from publication records in order to better quantify the informativeness of each association for a candidate’s expertise.

3.1 Association Scheme
Our proposed association scheme aims to weight a given
document-person association based on how informative the
document is of the expertise of the candidate. To this end,
we rely on an information-theoretic measure of the distance
between the language use in the document and in the entire
profile of the candidate. Precisely, our proposed association
scheme ρH (d, e) can be instantiated as follows:
ρH (d, e) = H(θe , θd )
X
=−
p(t|θe ) log p(t|θd ),

(2)

t

where H(θe , θd ) is the cross-entropy between the candidate
language model θe —built by concatenating all documents
associated with candidate e—and the document language
model θd . It can be shown that this formulation is equivalent to estimating the likelihood of generating the candidate language model θe given the document language model
θd [13]. It is also equivalent to the standard Kullback-Leibler
divergence between the two models minus the entropy H(θe )

926

technology, and innovation for individual researchers and
research institutions in Brazil. The LExR test collection
comprises metadata records for 11,942,014 scientific publications associated with 206,697 candidate experts from all
areas of knowledge working in multiple Brazilian research
institutions spread all over the country. Moreover, it includes 235 queries suggested by real experts who judged one
another on a graded scale. Grades 0, 1, 2, and 3 indicate
an unknowledgeable, somewhat knowledgeable, very knowledgeable, and expert person on the query topic, respectively.
As baseline association schemes, we consider a standard
boolean scheme (B), as well as non-boolean schemes based
on the divergence (KL) of document and candidate language
models built from each candidate’s name [6] and on a clustering (CL) of each candidate’s profile [14]. As baseline
normalization schemes, we consider the standard documentcentric (DC) and candidate-centric (CC) schemes [3] as well
as schemes aimed at profile length normalization based on
terms (Nt) and documents (Nd). All association and normalization schemes are deployed on top of Model 2 [3] as a
representative of state-of-the-art expert search approaches.
Model 2 is set to operate with the top 1,000 documents retrieved by a standard language model with Dirichlet smoothing with parameter µ = 2, 000. We index the title, keywords,
abstract, and author names as separate document fields after removing stop words and applying no stemming. All
indexing and retrieval operations use Apache Lucene 5.3.2
Our proposed association scheme in Equation (2) is deployed with document and candidate language models built
using the abstract and author name fields of each document.
Other textual representations showed similar effectiveness.
In turn, our normalization schemes in Equations (3) and (4)
are deployed with α = 2, which showed marginal improvements compared to the standard setting of α = 1. A full
parameter sensitivity analysis is left for future research.

of the candidate model θe , which is discarded here as it is
the same for all documents d. Based upon the latter observation, our proposed formulation can also be seen as a
generalization of the association scheme proposed by Balog
et al. [6] and discussed in Section 2. While their approach is
based on language models built from candidates’ names, we
evaluate our approach using multiple textual representations
for the document and candidate models. Finally, while alternative formulations (e.g., based on non-textual features)
are possible, we leave their investigation for future research.

3.2 Normalization Schemes
Existing expert search approaches linearly normalize association weights either by the sum of all related association
weights [3] or by the length of the candidate’s profile [16].
As discussed in Section 2, these approaches have been shown
to be effective, particularly in the enterprise domain, where
ambiguous associations may spuriously compromise the estimation of a candidate’s expertise. In the academic domain, where associations are generally unambiguous, such
linear normalization approaches may harshly penalize prolific candidates. To counter this limitation, we propose two
alternative normalization schemes aimed to measure the discriminativeness of each association. In particular, our soft
document-centric (SDC) normalization scheme is given by:

P
′ α
e′ ρ(d, e )
,
(3)
ψSDC (•) ≡ log
•
where the summation in the numerator comprises the weights
of all other associations related to target document d. Our
soft candidate-centric (SCC) normalization scheme can be
defined analogously with respect to target candidate e:
α
P
′
d′ ρ(d , e)
ψSCC (•) ≡ log
.
(4)
•
In both the SDC and SCC schemes, the logarithm provides
for a softer normalization compared to existing approaches
from the literature, with parameter α in the numerators controlling the intensity of the normalization—the larger α, the
softer the normalization. With α = 1, both normalization
schemes reduce to the information-theoretic concept of selfinformation [9], which quantifies the improbability of occurrence of a particular association given all other associations
related to the same document or candidate.

4.

4.2 Experimental Results
Table 1 shows the retrieval effectiveness of several association (ρ) and normalization (ψ) schemes in terms of normalized discounted cumulative gain (nDCG@10), precision
(P@10), and mean reciprocal rank (MRR). Our proposed association (ρH , Equation (2)) and normalization (ψSDC and
ψSCC , Equations (3)-(4)) schemes are highlighted in gray.
Statistical significance is verified using a paired t-test with
p < 0.01. Superscript and subscript triangles (N) denote significant improvements against the boolean association scheme
(ρB ) and the standard document- (ψDC ) or candidate-centric
(ψCC ) normalization schemes, respectively.
From Table 1, in order to address research question Q1,
we first analyze the effectiveness of our proposed association
scheme. In particular, when using a standard documentcentric normalization scheme (ψDC ), our association scheme
ρH consistently outperforms all other association schemes
(ρB , ρCL , and ρKL ) with respect to all evaluation metrics,
with significant improvements compared to the strongest
boolean association baseline (ρB ). On the other hand, when
using the standard candidate-centric normalization (ψCC ),
both the boolean association baseline as well as our proposed
association scheme underperform, probably because of the
harsh penalization applied to prolific candidates. Recalling
research question Q1, these results attest the effectiveness

EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION

In this section, we evaluate our information-theoretic association models for expert search in academia. In particular,
we aim to answer two research questions:
Q1. How effective is our proposed association scheme?
Q2. How effective are our proposed normalization schemes?
In the following, we describe the setup and discuss the
results of our empirical investigations.

4.1 Experimental Setup
Our evaluation is based on the Lattes Expertise Retrieval
(LExR) test collection [17], a publicly available test collection built on top of the Lattes platform,1 an internationally
renowned initiative for managing information about science,
1

2

http://lattes.cnpq.br/

927

http://lucene.apache.org/

ρCL
ρKL

nDCG
0.022
0.135

ρB

0.012

ρB
ρH

0.133
0.146N

ρB
ρH

0.164N
0.164N

P@10
0.014
0.082
ψNt
0.009
ψDC
0.079
0.088N
ψSDC
0.096N
0.099N

MRR
0.060
0.240

nDCG
–
–

0.039

0.061

0.254
0.279N

0.004
0.005

0.294N
0.291N

0.167N
0.168N

P@10
–
–
ψNd
0.008
ψCC
0.004
0.004
ψSCC
0.102N
0.103N

MRR
–
–

6. REFERENCES
[1] P. Bailey, N. Craswell, I. Soboroff, and A. P. de Vries.
The CSIRO enterprise search test collection. SIGIR
Forum, 41(2):42–45, 2007.
[2] P. Bailey, A. P. de Vries, N. Craswell, and I. Soboroff.
Overview of the TREC 2007 Enterprise track. In
Proc. of TREC, 2007.
[3] K. Balog, L. Azzopardi, and M. de Rijke. Formal
models for expert finding in enterprise corpora. In
Proc. of SIGIR, pages 43–50, 2006.
[4] K. Balog, T. Bogers, L. Azzopardi, M. de Rijke, and
A. van den Bosch. Broad expertise retrieval in sparse
data environments. In Proc. of SIGIR, pages 551–558,
2007.
[5] K. Balog and M. de Rijke. Finding experts and their
details in e-mail corpora. In Proc. of WWW, pages
1035–1036, 2006.
[6] K. Balog and M. De Rijke. Associating people and
documents. In Proc. of ECIR, pages 296–308, 2008.
[7] K. Balog, Y. Fang, M. de Rijke, P. Serdyukov, and
L. Si. Expertise retrieval. Found. Trends Inf. Retr.,
6(2–3):127–256, 2012.
[8] K. Balog, I. Soboroff, P. Thomas, N. Craswell, A. P.
de Vries, and P. Bailey. Overview of the TREC 2008
Enterprise track. In Proc. of TREC, 2008.
[9] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas. Elements of
information theory. John Wiley & Sons, 2012.
[10] N. Craswell, A. P. de Vries, and I. Soboroff. Overview
of the TREC 2005 Enterprise track. In Proc. of
TREC, 2005.
[11] H. Deng, I. King, and M. R. Lyu. Formal models for
expert finding on DBLP bibliography data. In Proc. of
ICDM, pages 163–172, 2008.
[12] Y. Fang, L. Si, and A. P. Mathur. Discriminative
models of integrating document evidence and
document-candidate associations for expert search. In
Proc. of SIGIR, pages 683–690, 2010.
[13] V. Lavrenko and W. B. Croft. Relevance Models in
Information Retrieval, chapter 2. 2003.
[14] C. Macdonald, D. Hannah, and I. Ounis. High quality
expertise evidence for expert search. In Proc. of ECIR,
pages 283–295, 2008.
[15] C. Macdonald and I. Ounis. Voting for candidates:
adapting data fusion techniques for an expert search
task. In Proc. of CIKM, pages 387–396, 2006.
[16] C. Macdonald and I. Ounis. Searching for expertise:
experiments with the Voting Model. Comput. J.,
52(7):729–748, 2009.
[17] V. Mangaravite, R. L. T. Santos, I. S. Ribeiro, M. A.
Gonçalves, and A. H. F. Laender. The LExR
collection for expertise retrieval in academia. In
Proc. of SIGIR, 2016.
[18] P. Serdyukov, H. Rode, and D. Hiemstra. Modeling
multi-step relevance propagation for expert finding. In
Proc. of CIKM, pages 1133–1142, 2008.
[19] I. Soboroff, A. P. de Vries, and N. Craswell. Overview
of the TREC 2006 Enterprise track. In Proc. of
TREC, 2006.
[20] J. Zhu, D. Song, and S. Rüger. Integrating multiple
windows and document features for expert finding. J.
Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol., 60(4):694–715, 2009.

0.028
0.018
0.020
0.295N
0.293N

Table 1: Retrieval effectiveness of several association
(ρ) and normalization (ψ) schemes. Our proposed
weighting schemes are highlighted in gray.
of our proposed information-theoretic association scheme,
particularly under a document-centric normalization.
To address research question Q2, we contrast our soft
normalization schemes (ψSDC and ψSCC ) to their standard
counterparts (ψDC and ψCC ) and the two profile length normalization baselines (ψNt and ψNd ). From Table 1, we observe that both of our proposed normalization schemes substantially outperform all baselines, with significant improvements compared to the standard document- and candidatecentric baselines with respect to all metrics. Recalling question Q2, these observations confirm the effectiveness of our
proposed soft normalization schemes. Indeed, substantial
improvements can be observed even when normalizations
are candidate-centric, which further emphasizes the benefits of avoiding a harsh penalization of prolific candidates.
On the other hand, the benefits of our improved association scheme ρH over boolean associations seem to be offset,
which suggests further investigations towards an improved
combination of association and normalization schemes.

5.

CONCLUSIONS

We have proposed novel information-theoretic models to
weight document-person associations for expert search in
academia. Unlike existing approaches, which attempt to
ascertain the authorship of a document, we proposed an association scheme aimed to estimate the extent to which the
document is informative of the expertise of each candidate
associated with it. Likewise, rather than penalizing prolific
documents or candidates to avoid noisy estimations of expertise, we proposed soft normalization schemes that seek to
infer how discriminative each association is. We evaluated
our proposed association and normalization schemes using
a publicly available test collection for expertise retrieval in
academia encompassing candidate experts from multiple organizations and with expertise in a range of diverse knowledge areas. Our results demonstrated the effectiveness of the
proposed weighting schemes, with substantial and statistically significant improvements over several baselines from
the literature. As a direction for future research, we plan to
extend our current investigation to non-textual association
schemes, exploiting temporal and social signals of expertise.

Acknowledgments
This work was partially funded by projects InWeb (MCT/
CNPq 573871/2008-6) and MASWeb (FAPEMIG/PRONEX
APQ-01400-14), and by the authors’ individual grants from
CNPq and FAPEMIG.

928

