Seeking Serendipity
A Living Lab Approach to Understanding Creative
Retrieval in Broadcast Media Production
Sabrina Sauer

Maarten de Rijke

Department of Computer Science
VU University Amsterdam

Informatics Institute
University of Amsterdam

s.c.sauer@vu.nl

derijke@uva.nl

ABSTRACT

experimentation environments in order to embrace the uncontrollable dynamics of daily life. Figure 1 shows the placement of living
labs compared to other innovation approaches. The approach uses a
myriad of user-centred design methods [6] to map user needs and
gain unforeseen user insights. Recent living lab studies stress that to
achieve optimal results, users should be included as equal partners
throughout technology development and that, to catch unforeseen
user ideas and behaviors, attention ought to be paid to how users
improvise with technologies-in-the-making [15].

This paper presents a method to map user needs and integrate
serendipitous search behaviors in search algorithm development: the
living lab approach. This user-centered design approach involves
technology users during technology development to catch unexpected insights and successfully innovate. This paper focuses on the
preliminary findings of a living lab case study to answer the question
how this methodology reveals fine-grained information about users’
serendipitous search behaviors. The case study involves a specific
user group, media professionals who work in broadcast television
and use audiovisual archives to create audiovisual content, during
the development of new search algorithms for a large audiovisual
archive. Research insights are based on data gathered during one
co-design workshop, and ten in-depth semi-structured interviews
with media professionals.
Findings stipulate that these users balance socio-technical constraints and affordances during creative retrieval to (1) find exactly
what is sought; and (2) increase the possibility of serendipitous,
unforeseen search results. We conclude that modeling these search
processes in terms of improvising with constraints and affordances
enables an effective articulation and channeling of user-technology
interaction insights into new technology development. The paper
suggests next steps in the living lab approach to further understand
serendipitous search and creative retrieval processes.

Keywords
Serendipity; Living labs; Creative retrieval

1.

Figure 1: Position of Living Labs as an open innovation platform; included with permission from [4].

INTRODUCTION

The idea that technology users can be sources of innovation has
led to organized efforts by technology developers and policymakers to include end users and user communities in innovation practices [19]. One of the ways in which end user inclusion in design
is sought is through living labs. These labs are organizations that
facilitate technology innovation in partnerships between public, private and civic actors. Living labs develop technologies by engaging
in an open innovation, user-driven research approach set in real-life

This paper presents ongoing research into the application of the
living lab approach to develop new search algorithms for a large
audiovisual archive. In particular, the paper seeks to unpack user
contributions and insights into user needs and search behaviors
during the first stage of the development process. The included
users are media professionals who make daily use of the archive
to create audiovisual stories. The paper investigates how the living
lab’s capacity to elucidate unforeseen user insights allows for a clear
understanding of the role that serendipity plays when these users
engage in creative retrieval; retrieving sources from the archive to
create new audiovisual stories. The paper thus specifically aims to
answer the question how the living lab approach facilitates and explicates the articulation of user-technology improvisation practices,
which helps to understand the process of finding unexpected but useful search results and allows these to inform new search algorithm
development. Our findings are useful for researchers who seek to
implement a user-centered design approach that translates unfore-

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.

SIGIR ’16, July 17 - 21, 2016, Pisa, Italy
c 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ISBN 978-1-4503-4069-4/16/07. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2911451.2914721

989

seen user ideas and serendipitous user behaviors into technology
development.
Data/entities in archive

2.

RELATED WORK

The living lab approach has been applied in Information Retrieval
(IR) research to primarily involve users in IR evaluation [3, 16].
Instead of concentrating on IR evaluation with users, the present
study focuses on one of the preceeding phases in technology development, namely ideation. In line with user-centered design cases in
IR, which indicate that co-developing with users helps refine search
goals, problems, and interface design [2, 20], this paper focuses on
both identifying user needs as well as understanding factors that
constrain user-technology interaction.
Related studies about the needs of audiovisual archive users, such
as media scholars and news journalists, provide categorisations of
information needs [10, 12] or more technologically-oriented needs
such as ease of access especially in relation to time: searching is
constrained by time pressures [1]. Bron et al. [5] map the (re)search
cycle of media scholars into three phases to support the development of exploratory search systems: exploration, contextualization
and presentation. During these phases, information needs change
iteratively from vague, via initial search questions to a refined final
research question. Search is thus about refinement, and the iterative search process itself contributes to the distillation of research
questions.
It is fruitful to relate this interplay between search processes and
search goals to McCay-Peet and Toms’ research [13] into serendipitous search. They argue that serendipity should not be studied
in terms of its triggers and instantaneity, but rather as a holistic
process that takes place during active learning, specifically during
exploratory search. In the IR literature, serendipity is seen as a
paradoxical concept: valuable, yet elusive [8]. In this paper, the
elusiveness of serendipity is connected to the living lab premise of
harnessing unexpected, serendipitous user ideas and behaviors to
innovate. To do so, we ground serendipity by theoretically relating
it, as a process, to improvisation.
In organizational theory, the term improvisation is used to describe the unforeseen way in which people navigate with(in) structures. This activity takes the shape of a constant orientation, a
mixture of making do and letting go “in response to an unexpected
opportunity or challenge” [14]. There are several reasons why improvisation is a useful concept to study how media professionals
search for and subsequently use audiovisual sources to create new
audiovisual narratives. First, it allows for a description of the route
that unfolds as users search in creative terms that move beyond what
Hassan et al. [9] would characterize as struggling and exploring.
Second, it anchors the unforeseen to (creative) retrieval practices,
which shows how the unforeseen gains meaning during audiovisual
narrative creation. Third, highlighting improvisations within the
digital search environment makes it possible to understand the tacit
knowledge these users have of said environment, which may then
inform the development of new search algorithms.

3.

User interaction/archive interface

User in professional context

Phase 1

Map user profiles, needs
& story generation

co-design workshop
interviews

Figure 2: Phase 1 mapping the user context.

dia professionals who use the archive, such as news documentation
specialists, television editors and digital storytelling practitioners.
The co-design session involved 19 project partners: 11 representatives from private and public parties, and 8 representatives from the
user group. Together, the partners discussed the project problem
and objective: how to develop self-learning search algorithms that
take into account professional user needs. During the session, three
creative research methods were employed to map the user context
and elicit user needs: empathic conversations and explorative play
were facilitated and the users engaged in user profiling [18]. These
methods were used in subsequent order, within a tight timeframe to
ensure that the main problem was actively tackled by sharing ideas
in different manners. The more abstract question to describe user
needs was translated into one that asked the partners to describe
what their ideal outcome of the project would be. They noted down
or drew their ideas onto Post-it notes, after which they discussed
their ideas within the larger group. The notes were collected and
grouped, and reflected on by the group in terms of important themes
and features. The second part of the session consisted of a user profiling session; the partners worked in two groups to draw overviews
of the different media professionals within the media landscape.
The produced drawings, together with the collected Post-its and
a transcription of the group discussion, provide a user-generated
reflection on and mapping of the characteristics of different (future)
users of the to-be-developed search algorithms. The users created 6
user profiles:
• images researchers/curators,
• desk researchers who work for broadcast companies,
• more short-term employed researchers,
• documentations specialists, who aid editorial teams with retrieval activities and also archive and annotate material,
• media innovation specialists who primarily seek to manage
projects, content, teams and cross-medial strategies, and
• mediacoaches who aid schools and develop educational concepts.
These user profiles formed the basis of the selection of interview
respondents. During the interviews, users described their daily
professional archive use and search behavior, elaborated on how
they integrate found sources into audiovisual stories and reflected
on ideas generated during the co-design session.

METHODOLOGY

This research is based on a user-centered living lab methodology
that seeks a close collaboration with the foreseen end users of the
to-be-developed search algorithms. In the first stage of the research
project, qualitative methods [7] are used to map the user context
(Figure 2). A grounded theory approach is furthermore used to
construct theoretical concepts from the collected data.
This first stage of research has taken the shape of 1 co-design
session followed by 10 in-depth semi-structured interviews with me-

4.

PRELIMINARY RESULTS

The co-design session allowed for a broad scoping of user needs
and search behaviors. Users listed specific ideas to optimize their
search processes, such as: the possibility to move beyond a textbased search engine to an image-based one, using keyframes to
quickly identify similar images, or alternatively, using text-based

990

search to find direct quotations within sources. In terms of enhancing search processes, users expressed the need to be able to
upload annotations to the archive and view annotations of peers;
user-generated annotation would allow for quick comparisons and
decision-making (“what does my colleague use when compiling
a news item, and how do I want to create an item about a similar
news story?”). Users also suggested visualizing relations between
found materials and the search query, to be able to quickly review
the context of a specific topic or theme. The need to be agile was of
utmost importance, due to extremely tight timelines associated with
the profession. At the same time, the need to find the unexpected
also came to the fore; materials need to be found quickly but should
also be surprising (Table 1).
These insights formed the basis of the subsequent interviews.
Taken together, preliminary results indicate that media professionals describe their search behavior as directly influenced by time
constraints and by the type of materials sought (video, audio, photographs, found using keywords such as person, broadcaster or date).
Their information needs are informed by profession type, professional contexts (work/team environment), and type of audiovisual
product that needs to be created. The interviewed users perceive
their search behavior as an iterative process during which they continuously consider whether a source aligns with the constraints and
affordances of their foreseen end product (television show, news
item or documentary). These are:
(1) time (for research as well as the duration of the final product,
e.g., 30 seconds or 25 minutes);
(2) the format and genre of their product;
(3) the target audience;
(4) the budget; and,
(5) their personal interest.
Figure 3 summarizes these insights, of phases in the development of
the audiovisual story, set against phases in their information-seeking
behavior. It is an iterative process, and unfolds in the context of
voiced constraints and affordances.

phases exploration contextualisation presentation
browsing
browsing
refined selection

processes domain

exploration
source
collection

story
development

initial
story

editing

source collection

refined
story

new
story

What is interesting is that users stress their craftiness in finding
fitting sources by seeking, on the one hand, audiovisual materials
that exactly fit their query, but also, on the other hand, sources that
are on the margin of what would be exactly relevant. Users note a
tension between finding “cliché” sources to, for instance, create a
news report about sensitive subjects, and a need to use “fresh” material to keep audiences interested. This insight is not genre-specific:
whether creating a news item, quiz question or documentary, users
continuously explore the boundaries of what they term the collective memory of the viewer. It is within this exploration that users
need serendipity, and seek in a “fuzzy” manner to find unforeseen
sources.
This play with affordances and constraints, inviting serendipitous
search results, is what we refer to as creative retrieval. Creative
retrieval, finding sources by improvising with affordances and constraints of both the foreseen audiovisual end product and the search
possibilities of archives, is an iterative process and geared at producing stories. The users’ voiced reflections on this process explicate
how they use their tacit knowledge to realize creative retrieval.

5.

CONCLUSION AND NEXT STEPS

This paper explores what insights about users’ serendipitous
search behaviors can be gleaned from the first phase of a usercentered living lab approach, when the objective of the living lab
is to involve media professionals during the development of new
search algorithms. The living lab approach seeks to elicit unforeseen
user ideas and behaviors to enhance product innovation. Likewise,
our research objective is to analyze the role played by serendipity
and unforeseen search result generation in order to develop search
technology that complies with, and supports, media professionals’
search needs and behaviors. Preliminary research outcomes suggest that users seek audiovisual materials in line with a number of
affordances and constraints, which are informed by the to-be produced audiovisual product as well as by contextual socio-technical
elements. This produces a search practice that can be characterized
as improvisational: a play with structures, guided by processes of
making do and letting go. It is within this improvisational practice
that media professionals aim to find two types of search results:
sources that exactly fit the search query as well as sources that are
serendipitous, useful yet not foreseen.

Constraints
Time
Budget
Genre
Audience
Personal
interest

Data/entities in archive

Affordances

Phase 3
in-situ
test

Figure 3: Overview of story development with associated
search processes. Arrows show possible sequences (adaptation
of Bron et al.’s model of the phases in media studies research).

User interaction/archive interface

User in professional context

Phase 2B

Describe entity relations,
explore tension between
direct needs & serendipitous
search process

Phase 2A Integrate user profiles,
needs & data collected
during search sessions

Phase 1

Map user profiles, needs
& story generation

co-design workshop
interviews

The finding that users try to find sources that are directly relevant
as well as surprising suggests that, in searching, users seek to elicit
serendipity, or “the meaningful experience of chance encounters”
[11]. These user expects that unforeseen and as-yet-unkown audiovisual sources will enrich their audiovisual products by allowing the
telling of new stories. This expressed need to find both expected
and unexpected sources can be translated into a user need for the
digital search environment of the archive to afford serendipitous
retrieval [17]; a fuzzy search approach, which supports user improvisation.

Figure 4: Next steps.
The next steps of the research aim to more fully grasp this improvisational search practice. In the next research phases (Phase 2A
and 2B in Figure 4), data is collected about user-archive interactions
via additional interviews, observations, and click-behavior analysis.
In parallel with this, the archive data is studied to analyze how to
technically translate user insights into algorithm development. In
the final stage (Phase 3) an in-situ living lab is to be realized within

991

User profile

Table 1: Users’ information needs and search behavior
Information need
Search behavior

Image researcher/curator

Content needs to fit topic, story, program genre
and time limit. Needs an entertaining, surprising
twist.

In accordance with an experience-based procedure that
starts with a broad topic exploration; based on editorial
team meetings and current events.

Documentation specialist

Content needs to correspond with very specific
search queries of (news)editors.

Defined procedure (own archive first); sources found in
text-based system; based on exact annotation.

(Desk) researcher

Content needs to be located fast; based on topic,
program genre; surprising content needed for historical programs, less surprising for news broadcast.

Described as “mean and lean”; high time pressure;
search based on entities, broadcaster, broadcast date.

Innovation specialist

Content needs to be found and presented it in a
meaningful manner; draw viewers in via surprising stories/media use.

Find and coordinate editorial teams consisting of search
experts to optimize processes.

Mediacoach

Content for media education needs to improve
pupils’ media skills.

Selecting appropriate material, in line with educational
vision.

the audiovisual archive to test the new algorithms and elicit an even
more fine-grained understanding of the iterative creative retrieval
process. By combining these methods, the living lab approach will
provide more definitive conclusions about the role that improvisation plays when media professionals engage in creative retrieval, as
well as allow for an evaluation of the extent to which the living lab
approach supports successful user-centered innovation practices.

[7]
[8]
[9]

Acknowledgements. This research was supported by Ahold, Amsterdam
Data Science, the Bloomberg Research Grant program, the Dutch national
program COMMIT, Elsevier, the European Community’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement nr 312827 (VOXPol), the ESF Research Network Program ELIAS, the Royal Dutch Academy
of Sciences (KNAW) under the Elite Network Shifts project, the Microsoft
Research Ph.D. program, the Netherlands eScience Center under project
number 027.012.105, the Netherlands Institute for Sound and Vision, the
Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO) under project nrs
727.011.005, 612.001.116, HOR-11-10, 640.006.013, 612.066.930, CI-1425, SH-322-15, 652.002.001, 612.001.551, the Yahoo Faculty Research and
Engagement Program, and Yandex. All content represents the opinion of
the authors, which is not necessarily shared or endorsed by their respective
employers and/or sponsors.

[10]

[11]
[12]

[13]

[14]

REFERENCES
[1] M. Anwar, H. Al-Ansari, and A. Abdullah. Information seeking
behaviour of Kuwaiti journalists. Libri, 54:228–236, 2004.
[2] B. Aryana, T. Clemmensen, and C. Boks. Users’ participation in
requirements gathering for smart phones applications in emerging
markets. Universal Access in the Information Society, 14:265–280,
2015.
[3] L. Azzopardi and K. Balog. Towards a living lab for information
retrieval research and development. A proposal for a living lab for
product search tasks. In Multilingual and Multimodal Information
Access Evaluation, pages 26–37, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011. Springer.
[4] P. Ballon, J. Pierson, and S. Delaere. Test and experimentation
platforms for broadband innovation: Examining European practice. In
16th International Telecommunications Society Europe Conference,
pages 1–22, Porto, 2005.
[5] M. Bron, J. van Gorp, F. Nack, M. de Rijke, A. Vishneuski, and
S. de Leeuw. A subjunctive exploratory search interface to support
media studies researchers. In SIGIR ’12: 35th international ACM
SIGIR conference on Research and development in information
retrieval. ACM, August 2012.
[6] K. Feurstein, A. Hesmer, K. Hribernik, K.-D. Thoben, and
J. Schumacher. Living labs: A new development strategy. In European
Living Labs - A New Approach for Human Centric Regional

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

992

Innovation, pages 1–14, Berlin, Germany, 2009. Wissenschaftlicher
Verlag Berlin.
R. Fidel. Qualitative methods in information retrieval research. LISR,
15:219–247, 1993.
A. Foster and N. Ford. Serendipity and information seeking: An
empirical study. Journal of Documentation, 59(3):321–340, 2003.
A. Hassan, R. White, S. Dumais, and Y. Wang. Struggling or
exploring? Disambiguating long search sessions. In SIGIR ’14: 37th
international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in
information retrieval. ACM, 2014.
B. Huurnink, L. Hollink, W. van den Heuvel, and M. de Rijke. Search
behavior of media professionals at an audiovisual archive: A
transaction log analysis. Journal of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology, 61(6):1180-1197, 2010.
T. W. Leong, F. Vetere, and S. Howard. The serendipity shuffle. In
OZCHI 2005, pages 25–28, Canberra, Australia, 2005.
B. Lunn. User needs in television archive access: Acquiring
knowledge necessary for system design. Journal of Digital
Information, 10(6):1–15, 2009.
L. McCay-Peet and E. G. Toms. The process of serendipity in
knowledge work. In Proceedings of the Third Symposium on
Information Interaction in Context, New Brunswick, New Jersey, 2010.
ACM.
W. Orlikowski. Using technology and constituting structures: A
practice lens for studying technology in organizations. Organization
Science, 11(4):404–428, 2000.
S. Sauer. User innovativeness in Living Laboratories – Everyday user
improvisations with ICTs as a source of innovation. PhD thesis,
University of Twente, 2013.
A. Schuth, K. Balog, and L. Kelly. Extended overview of the living
labs for information retrieval evaluation (LL4IR) CLEF lab 2015. In
Experimental IR Meets Multilinguality, Multimodality, and Interaction,
pages 484–496. Springer, 2015.
E. Toms. Serendipitous information retrieval. In DELOS Workshop:
Information Seeking, Searching and Querying in Digital Libraries,
2000.
D. van Dijk, F. Kresin, M. Reitenbach, E. Rennen, and S. Wildevuur.
Users as Designers – A hands-on approach to creative research. Waag
Society, Amsterdam, 2011.
E. van Oost, S. Verhaegh, and N. Oudshoorn. From innovation
community to community innovation: User-initiated innovation in
Wireless Leiden. Science Technology And Human Values, 34(2):
182–205, 2008.
S. M. Zabed Ahmed, C. McKnight, and C. Oppenheim. A
user-centred design and evaluation of ir interfaces. Journal of
Librarianship and Information Science, 38(3):157–172, 2006.

