General Chairs’ Welcome
It is our great pleasure to welcome you to SIGIR 2016, the 39th International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. SIGIR is back in Pisa, Italy,
after exactly 30 years from the 1986 edition; at that time the proceedings were still in paper form,
the conference did not have its own web page, Wi-Fi in the lecture rooms was not provided, and
delegates tweeting about their impressions were still rare. Notwithstanding the lack of the modern
commodities above, those who participated in that edition tell us stories of a lively and thoroughly
enjoyable event; we hope to live up to that tradition and offer you five days of engaging scientific
events, networking opportunities, and social fun.
The conference will start on July 17 with a day of (full-day and half-day) tutorials, plus the
Doctoral Consortium. SIGIR 2016 will enter its main phase in the three days that follow, when the
main conference (July 18-20) and the SIRIP Industry Track (July 20) will take place. The
stimulating technical program set up includes two valuable and insightful keynote talks opening
the first and the third day of the main conference:


Understanding Human Language: Can NLP and Deep Learning Help? by Christopher
Manning, Stanford University;



Big Data in Climate: Opportunities and Challenges for Machine Learning, by Vipin Kumar,
University of Minnesota.

The last day of the conference (July 21) will be entirely devoted to workshops.
We would like to take this opportunity to thank everybody who helped us in setting up SIGIR
2016. First of all, we would like to give heartfelt thanks to our sponsor, ACM SIGIR, and our
corporate supporters: Baidu (Platinum Supporter), Appen, Bloomberg, Booking.com, eBay,
Facebook, Google, Huawei, IBM, Microsoft, Yahoo! (Silver Supporters), and Yandex (Bronze
Supporter). All of them provided generous sponsorship, which allowed us to keep the registration
fees (believe it or not...) as low as possible and fund a lot of student travels. Thanks also to the
National Research Council of Italy and to the Qatar Computing Research Institute for supporting
our organizational work.
Putting everything together was a hard teamwork. We want to thank everybody involved in making
SIGIR 2016 an exciting event. First and foremost, we want to thank our Program Chairs Javed
Aslam, Ian Ruthven, and Justin Zobel, not only for chairing the selection of the full papers, but
also for painstakingly overseeing the rest of the scientific program. Many thanks also to the Short
Papers Chairs Ben Carterette, Carlos Castillo, and Jaana Kekäläinen, who had to deal with an
inordinate amount of short paper submissions under tighter-than-usual time constraints; to the
Tutorials Chairs Evangelos Kanoulas and Tie-Yan Liu; to the Workshops Chairs Aristides Gionis
and Edie Rasmussen; to the Demo Chair Craig Macdonald; to the Doctoral Consortium Chairs
Brian Davison and Kira Radinski; to the SIRIP Industry Track Chairs Jussi Karlgren and Gilad
Mishne; to the Sponsorship Chairs Fabrizio Falchi and Jimmy Huang; and to the Awards Chair
Norbert Fuhr. All of them went to great lengths to ensure the high quality of this conference. Quite
aside from the people who held chairing roles, lots of other people contributed to the scientific
success of SIGIR 2016: many thanks to the members of the Senior Program Committee, to the
members of the first-tier Program Committee, to the mentors of the Doctorial Consortium
Committee, and to all those who reviewed, in any capacity, full papers, short papers, tutorial and
workshop proposals, demo papers.

iii

Last but not least, we would like to thank all the members of the local organizing team at the
National Research Council of Italy; in order to keep the registration fees as low as possible, no
professional conference organization company was called in to help, and they took 100% of the
organization upon them. We would thus like our two Local Chairs Andrea Esuli and Chiara
Renso; our Treasurer Giulio Galesi; our Publications Chair Claudio Lucchese; our Publicity Chair
Nicola Tonellotto; our Webmaster Franco Maria Nardini; our Student Volunteers Coordinators
Alejandro Moreo Fernández and, again, Franco Maria Nardini. Thanks also to (in no particular
order) Catherine Bosio, Matteo Catena, Francesca Donati, and Sara Montesi for helping in various
phases of the organization. They all invested tremendous efforts into making SIGIR 2016 an
exciting and enjoyable event. It is due to them that the organization of SIGIR 2016 was not just
hard work, but also a pleasure.
We look forward to welcoming you in Pisa, Tuscany, possibly the most enchanting region of Italy,
surely the richest of artistic heritage and landscapes. Due to its history and the extraordinary
quality of food and wines, it is an unforgettable place to visit. We hope that you will be rewarded
by the technical challenges of SIGIR 2016 but you will get also a chance to explore our region and
enjoy its vibrant atmosphere!

Raffaele Perego

Fabrizio Sebastiani

ISTI-CNR, Italy

Qatar Computing Research
Institute, HBKU, Qatar

iv

