Short Research Papers 1A: AI, Mining, and others

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

Yelling at Your TV: An Analysis of Speech Recognition Errors
and Subsequent User Behavior on Entertainment Systems
Raphael Tang,1,2 Ferhan Ture,1 and Jimmy Lin2
1

2

Comcast Applied AI Research Lab
David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo

ABSTRACT

forcing users to reformulate their requests or surrender entirely.
This is especially harmful in our domain, since voice input is the
only tractable method for entering longer queries. In the mobile web
search literature, there exists a large body of work that characterizes
these recognition errors and subsequent user behavior [5, 6, 12].
However, as far as we are aware, this topic remains unexplored for
voice queries to entertainment systems.
Why is it important to specifically study this vertical? First, our
domain is unique and specific in content, revolving around the
needs of TV viewers, instead of the broad information needs of general web users. Second, entertainment systems differ greatly from
mobile devices in input modality, with users typically sitting down
and issuing queries far from the feedback source. We believe that
voice interactions in our context differ in key ways from personal
assistants, smart speakers, and other voice-enabled devices.
This paper presents an analysis of speech recognition errors
and subsequent behavior on the Comcast Xfinity X1 entertainment
platform based on voice queries from real users. We conduct a
quantitative analysis of speech recognition errors and subsequent
user reformulations, examining both acoustic and lexical features.
To shine light on the more nuanced verbal, non-verbal, and social
behavior of viewers, we report qualitative observations as well. We
are, to the best of our knowledge, the first to conduct an analysis
of this kind for voice-enabled entertainment systems.

Millions of consumers issue voice queries through television-based
entertainment systems such as the Comcast X1, the Amazon Fire
TV, and Roku TV. Automatic speech recognition (ASR) systems are
responsible for transcribing these voice queries into text to feed
downstream natural language understanding modules. However,
ASR is far from perfect, often producing incorrect transcriptions
and forcing users to take corrective action. To better understand
their impact on sessions, this paper characterizes speech recognition errors as well as subsequent user responses. We provide both
quantitative and qualitative analyses, examining the acoustic as
well as lexical attributes of the utterances. This work represents, to
our knowledge, the first analysis of speech recognition errors from
real users on a widely-deployed entertainment system.
ACM Reference Format:
Raphael Tang, Ferhan Ture, and Jimmy Lin. 2019. Yelling at Your TV: An
Analysis of Speech Recognition Errors and Subsequent User Behavior on
Entertainment Systems. In 42nd Int’l ACM SIGIR Conference on Research
and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’19), July 21–25, 2019, Paris,
France. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 4 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.
3331271

1

INTRODUCTION

Increasingly popular are TV-based entertainment systems such as
the Comcast X1, the Amazon Fire TV, and Roku TV—three platforms
whose collective subscriber counts exceed 80 million, based on conservative figures derived from reports on the companies’ websites.
A speech-enabled remote controller is an important component of
these intelligent systems, allowing viewers to conveniently perform
voice search over shows, channels, and live events. For example,
in response to the spoken query “The Sopranos”, the TV immediately switches to the desired show. Some entertainment platforms
also support more complex queries, such as “Show me all Scorsese
movies with Joe Pesci”. Speech input enables long, freeform queries,
which are too cumbersome to type on a keypad.
Automatic speech recognition (ASR) systems transcribe these
voice queries into text, over which rule- and deep learning-based
models [8] can be applied. Unfortunately, ASR systems frequently
produce incorrect transcriptions and corrupt the original queries,

2

BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK

Previous studies on mobile web search suggest that voice input
represents a paradigm shift from text input, concluding that it is not
merely text input enabled by speech. Depending on the platform,
voice queries are either shorter or longer than text queries [3, 11];
they appear more natural than text queries [3]; voice query users
tend to stick to voice input when reformulating queries (and not
switch to text input) [12]. Furthermore, voice input technology is
dogged by speaker variability and environment noise [13], issues
not present with text input.
Commercial voice-enabled entertainment systems are backed by
ASR systems which, despite significant advances in deep learningbased acoustic and language models, remain imperfect. Xiong et
al. [14] are the first to report achieving human-level accuracy on the
NIST 2000 speech recognition task, with a word-error rate (WER)
of 5.9%. Recently, Chiu et al. [2] successfully apply sequence-tosequence neural models to their 12,500-hour Google voice search
task, achieving a state-of-the-art WER of 5.6%. While certainly impressive, these WERs are still much greater than zero, resulting in
higher whole query-error rates when compounded across multiple words in a query. Rao et al. [8–10] describe several ASR and
query understanding challenges in their work on the Comcast X1
entertainment system.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6172-9/19/07. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331271

853

Short Research Papers 1A: AI, Mining, and others

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

Thus, characterizing speech recognition errors is an important
task, supported by a plethora of studies. In a comprehensive, controlled study, Jiang et al. [6] examine the query reformulation patterns of a group of participants when they encounter recognition
and system errors on Google. The researchers fix the information
need to selected TREC topics, finding that both speech recognition errors and system interruptions have significant deleterious
effects on ranking quality. In contrast, we collect and listen to actual
user queries on our platform, since behavior such as shouting may
be absent in a controlled, monitored setting. In a follow-up study,
Jiang et al. [5] use acoustic and lexical features to automatically
evaluate speech recognition and intent classification quality. Users
tend to emphasize speech [6] and reduce the speaking rate [5] in
their responses to recognition errors; however, a more accurate
phonetic-level analysis has not been performed.

3

Word Error Rate

Session Length to Word Error Rate

Session Length

Figure 1: WER along with 95% CIs for each set of sessions
in DS5Q, grouped by the number of queries. “Last query” denotes statistics of the last query of each group.

METHODS

Users of the Comcast Xfinity X1 product interact with the entertainment platform using a voice-enabled remote controller and
set-top box, which displays feedback on the television. Comcast
has delivered more than 20 million voice-enabled remotes to customers across the United States, processing more than 9 billion
voice commands in 2018. To issue a voice query, the user depresses
a microphone button, dictates a command, and releases the button, all the while receiving feedback through the television from
our streaming ASR system. Most of the queries can be classified
as “view” or “browse” intents, where the user desires to watch a
certain channel, program, or live event. However, the X1 supports
a broad range of additional functionalities—see Rao et al. [10] for a
taxonomy of intents we’ve previously developed.
As expected, viewers watch television for extended periods of
time, punctuated by intent switches. Thus, following the same
procedure as Rao et al. [10], we use these watch events as delimiters
for sessionizing queries, where a set of time-ordered voice queries
is defined as a session if it satisfies these conditions:

with one to five queries, respectively, for a total of 5127 queries, of
which 2250 are unique. We name this dataset DS5Q.
For our second dataset, to conduct a targeted, acoustic analysis
of our most popular keywords, we focus on two-query sessions that
satisfy these three conditions: First, both voice queries must have
the same true transcription. Second, they are one of these eight
keywords: “BET”, “CNN”, “Disney Junior”, “Fox News”, “Lifetime”,
“Netflix”, “Nickelodeon”, and “YouTube”. Third, the first query is
incorrectly transcribed by the ASR system, while the second is
correct. Although limited to eight keywords, this dataset represents
more than 10% of our total voice traffic. It should admit lower
acoustic sample variance than DS5Q in erroneous queries and their
responses, having fixed the view intent and transcription. The
dataset, which we call DS8K, contains 54 instances of “BET”, 30 of
“CNN”, 31 of “Disney Junior”, 19 of “Fox News”, 25 of “Lifetime”, 45
of “Netflix”, 13 of “Nickelodeon”, and 33 of “YouTube”, for a total of
250 queries.

(1) Each query is issued by the same device.
(2) Each non-first query occurs within 45 seconds of the last.
(3) There exists a watch event at the end, of at least 150 seconds
in duration, within 30 seconds of the previous query.

4

ANALYSIS

Closely following Jiang et al. [6], we present analyses of speech
recognition errors and user responses, guided by four research
questions: When do speech recognition errors occur, and what
effects do recognition errors have on the transcription? These seek
to characterize the nature of recognition errors in our sessionoriented dataset, DS5Q. Next, how do users lexically reformulate
their queries in response to errors? We conduct this analysis on the
sessionized DS5Q. Finally, how do users acoustically reformulate
their queries in response to errors? We conduct this analysis on the
keyword-oriented DS8K.

To construct our datasets, a team of four annotators listened to
and annotated thousands of voice queries from the week of January 2–9, 2019. Note that we collect and use all data in accordance
with our Privacy Notice; we do not store customer- and householdidentifiable information with voice recordings or transcriptions.
One annotator first transcribed all the queries; then, the other three
took turns verifying all of the annotations. Upon disagreeing, they
discussed the conflict to arrive at a unanimous decision. This annotation process resembles Jiang et al. [6].
Our data consists entirely of sessions, with all other queries
discarded (e.g., those with no final watch event), since they are
not relevant to answer our session-based research questions. To
impose a reasonable limit on the session length, we filter out all
sessions with more than five queries, which contribute to less than
0.2% of all sessions. From this pool of sessions, we then sample
from sessions of lengths one to five to construct a session-oriented
dataset. This dataset contains 1012, 517, 346, 262, and 199 sessions

4.1

Recognition Error Analysis

RQ1: When do recognition errors occur? In DS5Q, we find that
longer sessions are plagued with higher word error rates (WERs);
see Figure 1. “Watchthrough”, analogous to clickthrough in our
domain, is a highly effective form of implicit feedback for the transcription quality, with the last query of each session achieving
much lower WER than the overall session average. Single-query
sessions in particular have an extremely low WER of 0.01, yielding

854

Short Research Papers 1A: AI, Mining, and others

Measure
# queries
Session len.
Query word len.
Query char. len.

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

No ASR Errors

With ASR Errors

Type

Mean

SD

Mean

SD

3757
1.65
1.96
11.1

–
0.99
1.15
7.11

1370
1.72
2.30
12.4

–
0.97
1.57
8.57

New
63.9% Starz Encore 7→ Start Uncle
RemoveWords
14.0% Let’s go with it 7→ Let’s go
PhoneticConfusion
7.6% The Mag 7→ The Meg
7 KITV
ChannelAcronymError 5.8% KITE →
Stemming
5.0% Rockets 7→ Rocket
Substring
2.3% Total DramaRama 7→ Total Drama
AddWords
0.9% Bug’s Life 7→ A Bug’s Life
Superstring
0.5% Tube 7→ YouTube

Table 1: Query and session length statistics on DS5Q.

% Example (right 7→ wrong)

Table 2: Distribution of recognition error types on DS5Q.

“free”, high-quality labeled audio for training voice query recognition systems. Beyond single-query sessions, the WER increases
dramatically to 0.22 for two-query sessions, then gradually rises to
0.36 for five-query sessions. We observe that users repeat incorrect
queries to elicit a correct transcription, hence increasing the session
length. Longer sessions and queries are associated with ASR errors
(see Table 1), corroborating the findings of Jiang et al. [6].

Type
New
Same
AddWords
RemoveWords
WordSubstitute
Superstring
Stemming
Substring

RQ2: How do recognition errors affect queries? To characterize
how speech recognition errors change the system transcription,
we modify the high-precision taxonomy for query reformulation
introduced in Huang and Efthimis [4]. Although they originally
developed the ruleset for query reformulation, we can similarly
view the speech recognition system as an imperfect agent that may
perturb the original query, leading to an artificial reformulation. We
select the rules AddWords, RemoveWords, Stemming, Substring,
Superstring, and New, denoting whole word addition and removal,
morphological stemming, substring and superstring operations. All
other non-matching queries are presumed to have a new intent.
Following Huang and Efthimis, classification is accomplished by a
cascading sequence of rules, in the order referenced above. We also
add two rules of our own, specifically tailored for speech recognition
errors on entertainment systems:

No ASR Errors

With ASR Errors

%

%

Absolute ∆%

62.6%
17.2%
11.0%
5.2%
1.4%
1.3%
0.7%
0.6%

45.4%
36.4%
8.1%
5.2%
1.5%
1.6%
1.1%
0.7%

−17.2%
+19.2%
−2.9%
0%
+0.1%
+0.3%
+0.4%
+0.1%

Table 3: Lexical reformulation statistics on DS5Q.

4.2

Reformulation Analysis

RQ3: How are queries lexically reformulated? We also apply
the reformulation rules from Huang and Efthimis [4], excluding
abbreviation, to classify query reformulations between each pair
of consecutive queries on DS5Q. These results are presented in
Table 3, split on the presence or absence of recognition errors. Our
analyses are, of course, limited to sessions with at least two queries;
single-query sessions contain no reformulations. Faced with an
ASR error, users simply repeat the same query 36.4% of the time.
On the other hand, if no ASR error is present, the same query is
repeated 17.2% of the time. Compared to Jiang et al. [6], we note that
our users are much more likely to issue the same query, possibly
due to the lack of reformulation freedom for entity names, e.g.,
movie titles and channel names. The causes of repeated queries in
cases without ASR errors include system unresponsiveness and the
interleaving of voice and keypad input. We see that users are less
likely to add words after a recognition error (11% vs. 8.1%). The
other reformulation types see only small changes in distribution.

• ChannelAcronymError: the incorrect transcription is a channel acronym, e.g., “CNN”, and the true query is any single word.
This error is particularly egregious, since the TV may tune to a
different channel altogether.
• PhoneticConfusion: the incorrect transcription is within a
phonetic edit distance of one to the correct transcription. This
error suggests an acoustic and language modeling issue, e.g.,
“Allen Show” is extremely similar to “Ellen Show”.
We apply ChannelAcronymError as the first rule, and PhoneticConfusion as the last rule before New, the catch-all category.
For our grapheme-to-phoneme model, we use the CMU Flite [1]
synthesis engine. We model PhoneticConfusion after Metaphone
edit distance, as in Jiang et al. [5], where it is also used to measure
phonetic similarity for evaluating speech recognition quality.
The results of applying these rules to DS5Q are shown in Table 2.
We see that most transcription errors (63.9%) result in a New query
entirely. The recognition errors strongly tend to remove words
(14%) instead of adding words (0.9%); likewise, Substring (2.3%)
is more frequently applied than Superstring (0.5%). PhoneticConfusion (7.6%) is the third most common error type, followed by
ChannelAcronymError (5.8%), where many viewers erroneously
switch away from the current channel. We observe that Stemming
(5.0%) is relatively benign, with most errors resulting from incorrect
(lack of) pluralization.

RQ4: How are queries acoustically reformulated? We analyze
phonetic-level loudness and length qualities of the utterances in
DS8K. To extract phoneme boundaries, we run the popular Montreal
Forced Aligner [7] on the dataset. Then, we compute loudness and
length statistics over each phonetic segment, where the loudness
heuristic is defined as the standard A-weighted root mean square
of the amplitude. We split the queries into two groups: those with
recognition errors and those without, corresponding to the first
and second query of each session.
We report acoustic reformulation statistics in Table 4. From
the construction of DS8K, the first query contains an ASR error,
while the second query is correctly transcribed (see Section 3). The

855

Short Research Papers 1A: AI, Mining, and others

Type

Query #1

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

Query #2

Mean

SD

Mean

SD

∆p %

Total Length
Total Loudness

1.14
0.05

0.61
0.07

1.45
0.06

0.63
0.07

+42%†
+80%†

Silent Length
Consonant Length
Vowel Length

0.31
0.10
0.11

0.36
0.06
0.09

0.33
0.12
0.14

0.31
0.06
0.08

–
+46%†
+54%†

Consonant Loudness
Vowel Loudness

0.031
0.07

0.044
0.09

0.035
0.09

0.041
0.11

+92%
+124%†

laughing at a show—we posit that these all contribute to recognition
errors by distorting the acoustic characteristics of speech. Unsurprisingly, eating while watching television is common, with several
clips containing chewing and burping noises. Users end the behavior in their correctly transcribed responses, suggesting that they
perceive it as detrimental to recognition accuracy.
Social Phenomena. Finally, since watching television is often
an interactive experience, we observe complex multi-user behavior
in errors and their responses. In a few query sessions, the initial
user struggles with obtaining a correct transcription from the ASR
system, before another person intervenes and elicits the correct
transcription. In one exemplar session, a user struggles to pronounce the desired voice query, then we hear another person in
the background teaching the user.

Table 4: Acoustic reformulation statistics on DS8K. Length
units are in seconds; loudness is dimensionless. ∆p % denotes
relative changes in the means of differences across paired observations. † Differences are significant (p < 0.01) according
to the paired t-test.

5

We present an analysis of speech recognition errors in emerging
TV-based entertainment systems, analyzing phonetic, acoustic, and
lexical features of user reformulations. To pave the way for future
work, we report qualitative observations from transcribing thousands of voice queries. Potential extensions to this work include
building a targeted dataset for quantifying these observations, as
well as using them to improve existing ASR and NLP systems. For
example, we can use these reformulation patterns as priors for the
acoustic and language models—if we know the user speaks louder
and slower, the model can appropriately compensate. These are all
promising steps toward our ultimate goal of natural speech-based
interactions with intelligent agents.
Acknowledgments. This work was supported in part by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canada.

mean total length and loudness of the audio are longer and louder,
respectively, in the correct reformulations following the first set of
incorrectly transcribed queries. This confirms previous findings [5,
6] on the acoustic qualities of voice query reformulations. The mean
length of silence in the audio is not very different, implying that the
increased sample length results from actual speech and not holding
the microphone button for longer. Our phonetic-level statistics
demonstrate increased length and loudness in reformulations as
well: on average, in response to a recognition error, users increase
consonant and vowel lengths by 46% and 54%, respectively. The
loudness of consonants and vowels also rises by a corresponding
92% and 124%—interestingly, users emphasize and elongate vowels
more than consonants in their reformulations.

4.3

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

Qualitative Observations
REFERENCES

Through transcribing thousands of actual user queries, we observe
a multitude of acoustic and social phenomena that may explain
the recognition errors and responses, many of which are unlikely
to arise in a controlled laboratory setting, and a few of which are
unique to the entertainment domain. They range from guttural,
user-created noises, such as laughing during a television show, to
social behavior, such as passing around the microphone. Due to
the limited size of the dataset, we are unable to conduct significant
quantitative analyses on more nuanced user behavior. Nevertheless,
we provide qualitative observations to guide future studies.
Verbal Behavior. First, we observe verbal behavior consistent
with our quantitative analyses. Upon seeing incorrect transcription
feedback, many users increase the loudness of their voices and
decrease the phonation rate, which is similar to real-life human
behavior. Several users add pauses to their queries, often worsening
the desired transcription, such as “Hallmark” being recognized
as “Hall mark” in one query. As an expression of frustration, a
few users also shout into the microphone, resulting in amplitude
clipping of the audio. We further observe that many users tend to
“play” with their voices, wildly varying the loudness, pitch, and
length of syllables in a phrase. We note that these users are at least
partially self-aware, with several instances of them normalizing
their speech after a speech recognition error.
Non-Verbal Behavior. Next, we observe a variety of non-verbal
sounds in erroneously transcribed queries. Yawning while speaking,

[1] A. Black and K. Lenzo. 2001. Flite: A Small Fast Run-Time Synthesis Engine. In
4th ISCA Workshop on Speech Synthesis.
[2] C.-C. Chiu, T. Sainath, Y. Wu, R. Prabhavalkar, P. Nguyen, Z. Chen, A. Kannan,
R. Weiss, K. Rao, E. Gonina, N. Jaitly, B. Li, J. Chorowski, and M. Bacchiani.
2018. State-of-the-Art Speech Recognition with Sequence-to-Sequence Models.
In ICASSP. 4774–4778.
[3] I. Guy. 2016. Searching by Talking: Analysis of Voice Queries on Mobile Web
Search. In SIGIR. 35–44.
[4] J. Huang and E. Efthimiadis. 2009. Analyzing and Evaluating Query Reformulation
Strategies in Web Search Logs. In CIKM. 77–86.
[5] J. Jiang, A. Awadallah, R. Jones, U. Ozertem, I. Zitouni, R. Kulkarni, and O. Khan.
2015. Automatic Online Evaluation of Intelligent Assistants. In WWW. 506–516.
[6] J. Jiang, W. Jeng, and D. He. 2013. How Do Users Respond to Voice Input Errors?
Lexical and Phonetic Query Reformulation in Voice Search. In SIGIR. 143–152.
[7] M. McAuliffe, M. Socolof, S. Mihuc, M. Wagner, and M. Sonderegger. 2017. Montreal Forced Aligner: Trainable Text-Speech Alignment Using Kaldi. In Interspeech.
498–502.
[8] J. Rao, F. Ture, H. He, O. Jojic, and J. Lin. 2017. Talking to Your TV: Context-Aware
Voice Search with Hierarchical Recurrent Neural Networks. In CIKM. 557–566.
[9] J. Rao, F. Ture, and J. Lin. 2018. Multi-Task Learning with Neural Networks for
Voice Query Understanding on an Entertainment Platform. In KDD. 636–645.
[10] J. Rao, F. Ture, and J. Lin. 2018. What Do Viewers Say to Their TVs? An Analysis
of Voice Queries to Entertainment Systems. In SIGIR. 1213–1216.
[11] J. Schalkwyk, D. Beeferman, F. Beaufays, B. Byrne, C. Chelba, M. Cohen, M.
Kamvar, and B. Strope. 2010. “Your Word is My Command”: Google Search by
Voice: A Case Study. In Advances in Speech Recognition. Springer, 61–90.
[12] M. Shokouhi, R. Jones, U. Ozertem, K. Raghunathan, and F. Diaz. 2014. Mobile
Query Reformulations. In SIGIR. 1011–1014.
[13] Y.-Y. Wang, D. Yu, Y.-C. Ju, and A. Acero. 2008. An Introduction to Voice Search.
IEEE Signal Processing Magazine 25, 3 (2008).
[14] W. Xiong, J. Droppo, X. Huang, F. Seide, M. Seltzer, A. Stolcke, D. Yu, and G.
Zweig. 2016. Achieving Human Parity in Conversational Speech Recognition.
arXiv:1610.05256.

856

