Tutorial

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

Deep Chit-Chat: Deep Learning for Chatbots
Wei Wu

Rui Yan

Microsoft Corporation
Beijing 100080, China
wuwei@microsoft.com

Institute of Computer Science and Technology
Peking University
Beijing 100871, China
ruiyan@pku.edu.cn
tasks such as ticket booking and restaurant reservation etc., chatbots aim to engage users in human-machine conversation in open
domain for entertainment and/or emotional companionship. As a
result, it is easier for chatbots to go viral among end users without
specific purposes than task-oriented dialogue systems. For example,
until June of 2018, users from the five countries have finished more
than 30 billion conversations with XiaoIce; and on average, each
conversation lasts up to 23 turns. The promising user data indicate
impressive popularity of the chatbot product.
Goal of the tutorial. In contrast to the prosperity of chatbots
among end users, there are few systematic introductions to approaches about how to build the conversational engines behind chatbots in research communities. The reason might be that the conventional chatbots such as ELIZA are designed with hand-crafted rules
which are difficult to achieve real open domain human-machine
interactions. It is only until the recent two or three years that researchers (who benefit from the large scale social conversation data
available on the public Internet and the rapid advancement of deep
learning approaches) begin to develop principled and data-driven
approaches to build open domain conversational systems. Therefore, we believe it could be useful and valuable to give a tutorial
on recent progress of chatbots, particularly on applications of deep
learning approaches to building open domain dialogue engines.
The community would learn the insights behind chatbots in order
to fulfill the gap between task-oriented dialogue systems and nontask-oriented ones. In summary, we expect that our audience can
learn the following items from the tutorial: 1) new opportunities
modern chatbots, such as Microsoft XiaoIce, bring to academia,
industry, and the society; 2) how to build a state-of-the-art dialogue
engine with deep learning methods for chatbots; and 3) what are
likely to be the future solutions for making chatbots better.
Topic and relevance. Conversational AI is catching on fire:
academic conferences especially add new research tracks for conversational studies and attract unexpected growth in the number of
submissions to these tracks; companies from industry are making
great efforts to develop conversational products. We are entering
the AI era whereby large-scale big data become more easily available and learning techniques become more powerful. We may stand
at the entrance of future success in more advanced conversational
systems (social chatbots and/or virtual assistants). Although this
research area still faces bottlenecks and obstacles, we have witnessed a rapid surge of conversational studies in the past few years,
especially the chit-chat research in open domain.
The research topic “deep learning for chit-chat” is quite relevant
to the information retrieval community in following ways: 1) one
approach to implementing a chat system is through information
retrieval technologies, such as semantic matching, short text analysis, learning to rank, etc. As a result, half of the tutorial is about

ABSTRACT
The tutorial is based on our long-term research on open domain conversation, rich hands-on experience on development of Microsoft
XiaoIce, and our previous tutorials on EMNLP 2018 and the Web
Conference 2019. It starts from a summary of recent achievement
made by both academia and industry on chatbots, and then performs a thorough and systematic introduction to state-of-the-art
methods for open domain conversation modeling including both
retrieval-based methods and generation-based methods. In addition
to these, the tutorial also covers some new progress on both groups
of methods, such as transition from model design to model learning, transition from knowledge agnostic conversation to knowledge
aware conversation, and transition from single-modal conversation
to multi-modal conversation. The tutorial is ended by some promising future directions such as how to combine non-task-oriented
dialogue systems with task-oriented dialogue systems and how to
enhance language learning with chatbots.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Computing methodologies → Discourse, dialogue and pragmatics.

KEYWORDS
Human-machine conversation; deep learning; chatbot.
ACM Reference Format:
Wei Wu and Rui Yan. 2019. Deep Chit-Chat: Deep Learning for Chatbots. In
42nd Int’l ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval (SIGIR ’19), July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France. ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 2 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331388

Starting from ELIZA in 1960s, non-goal-oriented conversational
agents (a.k.a., chatbots) have never been so popular as in recent
years. Take Microsoft XiaoIce as an example. The chatbot was
first released to Chinese users in 2014 by Microsoft, and then was
launched in Japan (Rinna), U.S. (Zo), India (Ruuh), and Indonesia
(Rinna). The products now have attracted more than 800 million all
over the world, and the technologies behind have powered a great
number of business applications such as various third party official
accounts and IoT devices. Different from task-oriented dialogue
systems, which are designed for helping people complete specific
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6172-9/19/07.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331388

1413

Tutorial

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

retrieval-based methods for building a chatbot; (2) generation-based
methods, which represent the other approach to implementing a
chatbot, can be enhanced by retrieval-based methods. In fact, combining the two approaches in one framework is emerging as a new
research topic in open domain dialogue modeling; and (3) retrievalbased methods play an important role in real products such as
Microsoft XiaoIce and Amazon Alexa. Although there is a tutorial
entitled “Neural Approaches to Conversational AI” in SIGIR 2018,
the unique value of our tutorial lies in a comprehensive introduction
to open domain conversation modeling, especially retrieval-based
methods that are untouched by the previous tutorial.

1.3
1.4

• Single-turn chatbots: sequence-to-sequence generation
• Multi-turn chatbots: context-aware modeling
Non-hierarchical context modeling.
Various structures of hierarchical context modeling.
• Generation with additional information
Human-like chit-chat with persona and emotion.
Augmenting chit-chat with topic and knowledge.

1.5

1.2

Emerging trends
• Towards better evaluation for conversations
• Model optimization: reinforcement learning and adversarial
learning in conversations
• Towards controllable conversations: hard constraints and
soft constraints
• Towards open domain dialogue management
• Multi-modal conversation

1 TUTORIAL OUTLINE
1.1 Introduction to chatbots
•
•
•
•

Coffee Break
Generation-based chatbots

Insights from practice and products such as XiaoIce.
History review.
Recent advances.
Open domain dialogue systems.

Retrieval-based chatbots

1.6

• Single-turn response selection: message-response matching.
Frameworks with existing models as special cases.
Insights from the comparison on benchmark data.
• Multi-turn response selection: context-aware matching
Frameworks with existing models as special cases.
Introduction to benchmark datasets.
Insights from the comparison on the benchmarks.
• Knowledge enhanced response selection
Single-turn cases.
Multi-turn cases.
• New trends in research of response selection.
Matching with better representations.
Matching with deep interaction.
Learning a matching model from noisy data.

Summary and future directions
• Combination with task-oriented dialogues
• Language learning and cognitive learning

1414

