Short Research Papers 2C: Search

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

Towards Better Support for Exploratory Search through an
Investigation of Notes-to-self and Notes-to-share
Anita Crescenzi, Yuan Li, Yinglong Zhang, Rob Capra
School of Information and Library Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
[amcc,yuanli,yz6939,rcapra]@email.unc.edu

retrieval systems more closely with users’ knowledge development
(e.g., assisting users with capturing, organizing, and synthesizing
information they encounter); and (2) exploring ways that knowledge developed by one searcher can be used to help future searchers
seeking to understand similar information.
Prior research has investigated systems to help users take notes
and organize search histories [7–9, 22]. For example, tools such as
the Yahoo! Search Pad [7] were designed to help users save and
organize information found while searching. Researchers have also
explored how future searchers can benefit from the work of previous
searchers. As noted in [22], early work in this area considered
guided tours, path-based recommendations, and agents that aid
users in browsing. Research also has found benefits of showing
users the search trails of prior searchers’ activities [4, 21, 23] and
structured displays about procedural knowledge [1].
In the work presented here, we are interested in (1) the types
of information that users extract and save while searching, and (2)
how they organize this information for (a) their own future use, and
(b) future use by others working on similar tasks. To investigate
these issues, we conducted a lab study in which we asked people to
take hand-written notes that would be useful to themselves in the
future as they completed exploratory search tasks (notes-to-self ).
After participants finished their search, we asked them to create
a new set of notes, organized to be helpful to a future searcher
looking for information about the same task (notes-to-share). We
asked participants to take hand-written notes to observe the wide
range of structures and organization that pen and paper affords
that might be constrained by features and/or unfamiliarity with
electronic note-taking tools. At the end of the session we conducted
a semi-structured interview. In this paper, we address the following
research questions:
(1) What types of information were included in notes and why?
(2) What information was excluded from the notes and why?
(3) What approaches were used to construct the notes?
(4) How did participants organize information in the notes?
(5) How did the notes-to-self and notes-to-share differ?
We investigate these questions to inform the design of tools to
support exploratory searchers.

ABSTRACT
Recently, there has been interest in integrating information retrieval systems more closely with users’ knowledge development
processes, especially to support exploratory search. In this work, we
investigated how people organize and structure information they
discover during exploratory searches. In a lab study, we asked 24
participants to take hand-written notes they could use in the future
while they were completing an exploratory search. We then asked
participants to organize their findings to share with someone else
who wants to explore the topic. Finally, we conducted post-session
interviews to gain insights into the types of information saved
and how participants organized the information they found. In our
qualitative analysis of the notes and interviews, we found that the
notes included background information about the topic, key concepts, specific details, useful information sources, and information
to help with the broader work task. Notes were primarily structured in lists, and they reflected a combination of linear note-taking
strategies and grouping by information source or topical themes.
Participants changed the content and structure of the shared notes
to make them easier to understand and to provide a more thorough
overview of the topic. Our findings have implications for the design
of search tools to help current searchers organize, structure, and
synthesize information and to help future searchers engaged in
similar information seeking tasks.
ACM Reference Format:
Anita Crescenzi, Yuan Li, Yinglong Zhang, Rob Capra. 2019. Towards Better
Support for Exploratory Search through an Investigation of Notes-to-self
and Notes-to-share. In Proceedings of the 42nd International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR
’19), July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 4 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331309

1

INTRODUCTION

An important challenge in supporting exploratory search is to
understand how people organize, structure, and synthesize information that they discover during a search process. Gaining insights
in these areas can inform two promising approaches: (1) integrating
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6172-9/19/07. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331309

2

RELATED WORK

In academic contexts, researchers have identified important functions of note-taking: storage (e.g., reviewing notes can facilitate
retention of information), and encoding (e.g., the process of notetaking itself can aid learning) [11]. Research has also suggested
benefits of providing students with information outlines and notes
and about learning outcomes [16]. Note-taking can involve metacognitive processes during information search including: selecting

1093

Short Research Papers 2C: Search

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

relevant information, connecting new information, and monitoring
progress [18]. Marshall and Bly [14] found that while reading, people saved information they thought might be useful and to share
with others. Knowledge workers record facts, actions, ideas, and
decisions in their notes [10]. Khan [10] found that notes were often
organized chronologically. Capra et al. [5] reported that workers
used hand-written and electronic notes to support searches.
Prior work has also considered the structures that people use to
organize information. Marshall, Shipman, and their colleagues [13,
15] found that lists, outlines, matrices, and tables were commonly
used to organize information. Khan [10] found that workers often
organized their notes chronologically.
Researchers have designed and studied tools to support information organization and sharing. Prior work has explored tools to help
users: (1) save, annotate, and organize information while reading
(e.g., XLibris [20]) and web browsing (e.g., Search Pad [7]), (2) collaboratively organize information (e.g., Digital IdeaKeeper [25]), and
(3) provide novice searchers with knowledge from experts about
how to search (e.g., StrategyHub [1]). Prior work has also explored
how people can benefit from shared social annotations [6, 24].
This review suggests that flexible, linear, and idiosyncratic notetaking styles may be easier (and even required) for an exploratory
searcher to use when creating notes. However, non-linear structures
may be more beneficial in helping searchers learn (e.g. gaining
an overview, tracking progress, and synthesizing). In this paper,
we investigate how notes are organized and created during an
exploratory search, and how notes may be created to help others.

3

water for drinking during long hiking trips. In this article, you need
present options to your readers and describe how they differ.

The WIC task is an open-ended exploratory task, and the PUR
task is a comparative task (i.e., compare methods along dimensions).
Protocol— Participants completed the study in a quiet room
using a Windows 10 PC and Chrome web browser with the history
cleared. Participants used a system based on the Bing Web Search
API that presented results in a standard SERP layout.
At the beginning of the session, participants were given an
overview of the study and asked to review and sign an informed
consent form. Participants were introduced to the search system
and presented with the search task described in the previous section.
Participants were given pen and paper and were reminded to take
notes that would be helpful to themselves to resume this task in the
future (notes-to-self). Participants could issue queries, view pages,
and take notes as they wished; they were given up to 20 minutes
and could work at their own pace. After the first set of notes were
completed, we gave participants fresh paper and up to 15 minutes
to create new notes that would be helpful for a future searcher
(notes-to-share). Participants were informed during consent that
their notes might be shared with others. However, to avoid priming
effects, we did not give instructions about the notes-to-share until
after participants had completed their notes-to-self.
Organize your findings to share with someone else
Next, we would like you to use a new sheet of paper to organize the
information you found for this task in order to help someone else
who wants to explore this topic but is not already familiar with it.
You can organize or structure the information however you think
will be the most helpful for someone else to explore this topic later.

METHOD

We conducted a lab study in which 24 participants were (1) given
a search task, (2) asked to take hand-written notes that would be
useful to themselves while they searched (notes-to-self ), and (3)
after completing the search, asked to create a new set of notes
that would be helpful to a future searcher working on a similar
task (notes-to-share). We conducted a semi-structured interview at
the end of the session. We recruited 24 participants (16 female) by
posting an email to a campus-wide opt-in listserv at our university.
Search tasks—As recommended by [2], we gave participants a
simulated work task scenario to help contextualize the task:

While working on the notes-to-share, participants could refer to
their own notes-to-self or go back to pages in their browser search
histories. After completing the notes-to-share, we conducted a postsession semi-structured interview. We asked questions about what
information they included and excluded in the notes (and why),
what changes they made between the notes-to-self and notes-toshare (and why), and how they organized or structured the notes
(and why). The interviews lasted about 10 to 20 minutes and were
audio recorded. The complete study session lasted about 1 to 1.5
hours and participants were compensated $20 USD. Our study
protocol received university ethics board approval.
Data Analysis—We conducted qualitative analysis of the interview data and the paper notes (notes-to-self and notes-to-share). For
the interviews, in the first round of coding, all four researchers independently coded four interviews using a combination of inductive
and deductive coding methods [19]. The codes were reconciled to establish an initial coding scheme that was refined in two subsequent
coding rounds. In the final round of coding, two researchers each
coded approximately half the data and then reviewed each others’
codes; marked points of disagreement; and concluded with a phase
of negotiated agreement [3]. The paper notes were coded using the
same coding scheme and a coding review process. Coding materials
available at: https://ils.unc.edu/searchstructures/sigir2019/.

Imagine you are a writer working for an online magazine. Recently, your editor asked you to do research for an article on the
following topic:
«Search task was presented here»
Today, your editor would like you to do initial research to get a
broad overview of the topic. Your goal should be to identify as
many factors and dimensions related to the topic as you can find.
Use the pen and paper provided to take notes that would be
helpful to yourself to resume work on this task in the future.

Participants were randomly assigned one of two tasks:
Women in Computing (WIC) – Recent reports indicate that
many fewer women than men earn computer and information
science undergraduate degrees, and that while women are avid
users of new technologies, they continue to be significantly underrepresented in technical occupations.

4

Water Purification (PUR) – On extended hiking trips, hikers may
need to purify water from nearby streams because it is not feasible
for them to carry all the water they will need. Your editor asked
you to write an article about different methods to purify stream

RESULTS

Next, we present results of our analysis of the notes-to-self (nsel f ),
notes-to-share (nshar e ), and post-session interviews. Recall that
each of our two tasks (WIC, PUR) was completed by 12 participants.

1094

Short Research Papers 2C: Search

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

RQ1: What information was included in the notes? Based
on our qualitative analyses of the notes and interviews, we identified several types of information included in the notes:
(1) Background information – information included to provide
context for the task topic. For example, for the WIC task, many participants included information about the current status of women in
computing (nsel f =11, nshar e =11). For the PUR task, many included
different contaminants found in water (nsel f =6, nshar e =5).
(2) Facets of the topic – information about specific facets of the
topic including items, dimensions, or factors. For the WIC task,
these included causal factors and potential solutions (nsel f =11,
nshar e =11). For the PUR task, these included purification methods
such as boiling, filtering, and using chemicals (nsel f =12, nshar e =12).
(3) Specific details – including statistics, specific efforts or products, and other details to provide evidence or insights. For the
WIC task, these often included statistics about women in computing (nsel f =11, nshar e =11). For the PUR task, many participants
included specific water purification products (nsel f =7, nshar e =6).
(4) Information sources – useful information such as the name of
the source (e.g., USA Today, nsel f =16, nshar e =5) or a full or partial
URL (e.g., adventures.com, nsel f =8, nshar e =5). In the interviews,
participants described including sources to support future finding
or re-finding (nsel f =9) and to help others (nshar e =5).
(5) Information to help with work task – participants included
information to plan the task (e.g., an outline, n=10), to assist with
re-finding (e.g., useful queries, n=13), assessments of information
quality (n=3), and lists of unanswered questions (n=3).
RQ2: Why was information excluded? During the interview
we asked about why participants chose to leave information out of
the notes. They described the following:
(1) Too much detail – information that was viewed to be too
detailed or that they regarded as minutia (nsel f =9, nshar e =17).
(2) Redundant – information that was redundant with information they had already included (nsel f =5, nshar e =6).
(3) Tangentially-related information – information that was only
tangentially related or beyond the main focus (nsel f =8, nshar e =6).
(4) Information that could easily be found/re-found – information
perceived to be easy to find (nsel f =5, nshar e =10).
(5) Subjective information/advertisements (nsel f =4, nshar e =2).
(6) Information omitted due to time constraints (nsel f =5, nshar e =6).
RQ3: What strategies were used for organizing information? Our analyses showed that participants used a combination
of linear and grouping strategies for their note-taking.
(1) Linear strategy – The linear strategy was characterized by
participants taking notes in the order they encountered information
during task (nsel f =16, nshar e =0). Participants described using a
linear strategy because they could simply follow the flow of their
search and because they are accustomed to linearly creating notes.
(2) Grouping strategies – Participants also used strategies that
involved creating groups of related sets of information (nsel f =18,
nshar e =24). We observed grouping by information source (often
used with a linear strategy) and by topical themes. Participants
discussed several reasons for using grouping strategies: 1) they had
identified clear sub-topics; 2) grouping can make the notes easier
to read; and 3) they were familiar with grouping information.

(3) Combined strategies. Participants described initially using a
linear process with less structured notes-to-self since they were
not sure what they would find. Then, after they had learned about
the topic, they organized the information based on themes.
RQ4: What structures were used to organize information?
(1) List – We defined a list as a sequence of items, often indicated by a syntactical structure (e.g., bullets or numbers). All 24
participants used lists in both sets of notes. List structures were
used both as part of linear note-taking and as part of grouping
strategies. Participants described reasons why they used lists: 1)
they are familiar and easy to create; 2) they reflect participants’
cognitive processes and are easy to understand.
(2) Multi-level lists – Participants also used multi-level or hierarchical lists to represent more complex structures (nsel f =14,
nshar e =12). To distinguish the levels of hierarchical lists, participants used a variety of syntactic elements including bullet points,
dashes, indentation, letters and numbers.
(2) Matrix – A matrix organizes content using rows and columns
and is well-suited to comparative tasks such as our PUR task. However, only two participants used a matrix, both for their PUR task
notes-to-share. We did observe participants creating “parallel” lists.
For example, one participant created three columns ("best", "good",
and "not recommended") under which they listed different methods
for their PUR notes-to-share. Participants described reasons for not
using matrix structures: 1) they chose to use lists, a more familiar structure; and 2) constructing a matrix requires more topical
knowledge and effort.
(3) Other structures – For their notes-to-share, four participants
created an outline of the proposed magazine article and one participant used a concept map. Participants discussed several reasons
they did not use complex structures: 1) lack of a clear starting point;
2) uncertainty about structure due to an incomplete understanding
of the topic; 3) lack of experience using complex structures.
RQ5: What differences were there between the notes-toself and the notes-to-share? During the post-session interview,
participants described creating their notes-to-share to make them
easier for others to use. For example, one participant mentioned
that for the notes-to-self they left things out that they already knew,
but they included these in the notes-to-share for the benefit of the
future searcher. We also observed that the notes-to-self contained
more abbreviations and shorthand. Participants described how their
notes-to-share contained more synthesis of the topic, more introductory/overview material, and that they were more selective in
the details they included. Finally, participants described structural
differences they made to make notes-to-share easier to read (n=14),
to make the flow and structure more logical and clear (n=8), and to
make it easier find and process the information (n=5).

5

DISCUSSION

RQ1/RQ2: What information was included/excluded in the
notes? Our participants included background information, facets,
specific details, useful information sources, and information to help
with the overall work task. Participants excluded information from
their notes when it was too detailed, too subjective, redundant,
tangentially-related, could easily be re-found, and due to time constraints. These observations are consistent with prior work that
has identified: similar types of information included in notes (e.g.,

1095

Short Research Papers 2C: Search

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

facts, ideas or summaries [10]); similar motivations for including
information in notes (e.g., for later use [14], to trigger one’s memory
in the future [12]); and similar reasons for not taking notes (e.g.
information was not relevant or based on opinions [10]).
RQ3: What strategies were used? Our participants used both
linear and grouping strategies in their note-taking. Prior work
has found that students often use linear styles of note-taking, and
that non-linear strategies require more planning and cognitive
effort [17]. Similar to prior work, we saw evidence that grouping
involved more synthesis and effort; our participants used grouping
by themes in the notes-to-self after they began to learn about the
topic, and when creating their synthesized notes-to-share.
RQ4: How were notes organized? Lists and groups were the
most frequently used structures, often due to participants’ familiarity with them. However, multi-level lists were used by some
participants to indicate relationships. In this way, multi-level lists
represent a “middle-ground” – they did not require the pre-planning
of a matrix/outline, but supported users’ needs to show relationships and structure between different concepts [11]. We note that
hand-written notes allowed us to explore such organizational variety; however, it may have limited direct copying of text/URLs.
RQ5: Differences between notes-to-self and notes-to-share.
In the notes-to-share, participants added structure and organization to make the notes easier to follow; included things that they
thought would be helpful to a future searcher; and removed shorthand, abbreviations, and details that they felt were not important.
Marshall and Brush [14] found similar editing behaviors among
students prior to sharing annotations in an online discussion.
Implications. Below we consider implications of our work in
the context of designing tools to support exploratory search.
(1) Integrate search and note-taking. Integrating note-taking tools
into the search process may provide benefits to searchers. Consistent with prior work [17], while taking notes, participants in our
study showed evidence of learning (e.g., grouping and making connections between concepts). Providing tools that integrate search
and note-taking has the potential to improve learning.
(2) Use integrated note-taking tools to assess learning. Integrating
note-taking tools into the search process may enable a system to
infer the amount of learning that is taking place (e.g., by observing
changes in notes and structures). Such a system would be advantaged over a system that can only consider search interaction data
such as queries and clicks. In this way, note-taking tools could help
people learn and also help with system evaluation.
(3) Note-taking tools need to be light-weight and flexible. For our
participants, note-taking while searching was a fluid process involving integrating new information into existing notes, combining
concepts, and re-organizing structures. Tools to support note-taking
during search need to be light-weight and flexible.
(4) Notes are a potential form of search assistance. Our participants’
notes had many characteristics in common. This suggests that even
partial notes from a previous searcher may help a new searcher
working on a similar task. Notes may help by providing useful
scaffolding. However, they may limit search breadth.
(5) Not all notes are created equal. Notes created early in a search
process may be largely linear lists rather than well-organized, synthesized notes. Future work is needed to understand what factors
influence the quality of notes to assist a future searcher.

1096

6

CONCLUSION

We conducted a lab study in which we asked participants to take
notes as they performed an exploratory search task. After searching, we asked them to create a new set of notes organized to be
helpful to a future searcher working on the same task. Through
qualitative analysis of the notes and post-session interviews, we
identified types of information that were included/excluded, strategies used, structures used, and differences between the notes-to-self
and notes-to-share. Our findings provide insights and recommendations for tools that integrate note-taking and search, including
opportunities (1) to address searchers’ needs to organize and synthesize information, (2) to use note-taking tools to aid and assess
learning during search, and (3) to act as forms of search assistance.

Acknowledgements: This work was supported by NSF grant IIS-1552587.
We also thank Jaime Arguello for his helpful feedback on this paper.

REFERENCES
[1] Suresh K. Bhavnani, Bichakjian K. Christopher, Timothy M. Johnson, Roderick J.
Little, Frederick A. Peck, Jennifer L. Schwartz, and Victor J. Strecher. 2003. Strategy hubs: Next-generation domain portals with search procedures. In Proc. CHI
(CHI ’03). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 393–400.
[2] P. Borlund. 2003. The IIR evaluation model: A framework for evaluation of
interactive information retrieval systems. Information Research 8, 3 (2003), 1–34.
[3] John L. Campbell, Charles Quincy, Jordan Osserman, and Ove K. Pedersen. 2013.
Coding in-depth semistructured interviews: Problems of unitization and intercoder reliability and agreement. Soc. Methods & Research 42, 3 (2013), 294–320.
[4] Robert Capra, Jaime Arguello, Anita Crescenzi, and Emily Vardell. 2015. Differences in the use of search assistance for tasks of varying complexity. In Proc.
SIGIR. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 23–32.
[5] R. Capra, G. Marchionini, J. Velasco-Martin, and K. Muller. 2010. Tools-at-hand
and learning in multi-session, collaborative search. In Proc. CHI. ACM, 951–960.
[6] J. R. Davis and D. P. Huttenlocher. 1995. Shared annotation for cooperative
learning. In Proc. CSCL (CSCL ’95). Erlbaum, 84–88.
[7] D. Donato, F. Bonchi, T. Chi, and Y. Maarek. 2010. Do you want to take notes?
Iden. research missions in Yahoo! search pad. In Proc. WWW. ACM, 321–330.
[8] David Gotz. 2007. The ScratchPad: Sensemaking support for the web. In Proc.
WWW (WWW ’07). ACM, Beijing, China, 1329–1330.
[9] Ken Hinckley, Shengdong Zhao, Raman Sarin, Patrick Baudisch, Edward Cutrell,
Michael Shilman, and Desney Tan. 2007. InkSeine: In Situ search for active note
taking. In Proc. CHI (CHI ’07). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 251–260.
[10] Fawzia Khan. 1993. A survey of note-taking practices. Technical Report HPL-93107. HP Labs Bristol. http://www.hpl.hp.com/techreports/93/HPL-93-107.html
[11] Kenneth A. Kiewra. 1989. A review of note-taking: The encoding-storage paradigm and beyond. Educational Psychology Review 1, 2 (1989), 147–172.
[12] Min Lin, W. G. Lutters, and T. S. Kim. 2004. Understanding the micronote lifecycle:
Improving mobile support for informal note taking. In Proc. CHI. 687–694.
[13] C. Marshall. 1997. Annotation: From paper books to the digital library. In Proc.
ACM Intl. Conf. Digital Libraries (DL ’97). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 131–140.
[14] C. Marshall and S. Bly. 2005. Saving and using encountered information: implications for electronic periodicals. In Proc. CHI. ACM, 111–120.
[15] C. Marshall and A. J. Brush. 2004. Exploring the relationship between personal
and public annotations. In Proc. JCDL. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 349–357.
[16] Peggy Van Meter, Linda Yokoi, and Michael Pressley. 1994. College students’
theory of note-taking derived from their perceptions of note-taking. J. Ed.
Psychology 86, 3 (1994), 323–338.
[17] Annie Piolat, Thierry Olive, and Ronald T. Kellogg. 2005. Cognitive effort during
note taking. Applied Cognitive Psychology 19, 3 (2005), 219–312.
[18] D. Rogers and K. Swan. 2004. Self-regulated learning and Internet searching.
Teachers College Record 106, 9 (2004), 1804–1824.
[19] J. Saldaña. 2009. The Coding Manual for Qualitative Researchers. Sage Pub. Ltd.
[20] Bill N. Schilit, Gene Golovchinsky, and Morgan N. Price. 1998. XLibris: The active
reading machine. In Proc. CHI. ACM, 22–23.
[21] Alan Wexelblat and Pattie Maes. 1999. Footprints: History-rich tools for information foraging. In Proc. CHI. ACM, 270–277.
[22] R. W. White. 2016. Interaction with Search Systems. Cambridge Univ. Press, NY.
[23] R. W. White, M. Bilenko, and S. Cucerzan. 2007. Studying the use of popular
destinations to enhance web search interaction. In SIGIR. ACM, 159–166.
[24] Yusuke Yanbe, Adam Jatowt, Satoshi Nakamura, and Katsumi Tanaka. 2007. Can
social bookmarking enhance search in the web? Proc. JCDL, ACM, 107–116.
[25] M. Zhang and C. Quintana. 2012. Scaffolding strategies for supporting middle
school students’ online inquiry processes. Comp. & Ed. 58, 1 (2012), 181–196.

