Short Research Papers 2B: Recommendation and Evaluation

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

A Lightweight Representation of News Events on Social Media
Mauricio Quezada

Barbara Poblete

mquezada@dcc.uchile.cl
Department of Computer Science,
Universidad de Chile & IMFD
Chile

bpoblete@dcc.uchile.cl
Department of Computer Science,
Universidad de Chile & IMFD
Chile

ABSTRACT

platforms present their content to the consumer in one of two ways:
(1) by displaying user posts in reverse chronological order, or (2) by
displaying posts in a personalized fashion, showing first what they
deem more interesting to the user. However, if the user is seeking
information about a specific event, the aforementioned approaches
can result also in unnecessary exposure to redundant, irrelevant, or
even misleading information. In this context, delivery of key pieces
of information to the user is important, and even critical in some
cases; for instance, social media is often used as a complementary
source of information for disaster management and response [1, 12]
and also to obtain information about newsworthy events not yet
reported by formal news outlets.
Despite the usefulness of social media as a worldwide news information source, its consumption is not without challenges. These
challenges include, among many others, correctly assessing information veracity and relevance to a specific topic, as well as dealing
with a huge volume of data with variable quality. In particular, we
study Twitter1 , a popular microblog platform in which users can
post text-based messages. These messages, called tweets can include
links to images, videos, to external webpages or to other tweets,
making this platform’s content multimodal. The URLs shared in
Twitter often link to varied types of media (articles, images, or
videos), which have been found useful for identifying conversation
topics [9]. In the context of news events, users tend to quickly reshare information if the event sparks high interest [7], which results
in many (near-)duplicate messages. Prior work has acknowledged
the need to develop techniques for dealing exclusively with this
type of social media data.
In this work we focus on the problem of producing summarized
representations of social media data related to news events without
significant loss of information. We present a compact representation
for social media content related to news events. This representation
allows us to preserve information about the topics involved in an
event, and to identify relevant content, while reducing the volume
of data. This can be especially useful for online data processing
about developing news and news information seeking tasks. To
achieve this, our model annotates shared URLs with the text of the
messages in which they appear. Here we use messages as anchor
text or surrogate text. We first leverage this idea by identifying
relevant URLs that are shared in social media during a news event.
We discard URLs that are too general with respect to an event (e.g.
a general report), or generic (e.g. linking to the homepage of a news
outlet) as we deemed them as non-relevant. Then we aggregate all
the anchor texts associated with relevant URLs into documents, and
all the conversations around those documents as well.
As a preliminary way to study the usefulness of our event representation, we applied it to three news events as a case study. We

The sheer amount of newsworthy information published by users
in social media platforms makes it necessary to have efficient and
effective methods to filter and organize content. In this scenario,
off-the-shelf methods fail to process large amounts of data, which
is usually approached by adding more computational resources.
Simple data aggregations can help to cope with space and time
constraints, while at the same time improve the effectiveness of
certain applications, such as topic detection or summarization. We
propose a lightweight representation of newsworthy social media
data. The proposed representation leverages microblog features,
such as redundancy and re-sharing capabilities, by using surrogate
texts from shared URLs and word embeddings. Our representation
allows us to achieve comparable clustering results to those obtained
by using the complete data, while reducing running time and required memory. This is useful when dealing with noisy and raw
user-generated social media data.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems → Document collection models.

KEYWORDS
social media, news events, graphs, modeling, topic detection, summarization, word embeddings, clustering, anchor text
ACM Reference Format:
Mauricio Quezada and Barbara Poblete. 2019. A Lightweight Representation
of News Events on Social Media. In Proceedings of the 42nd International
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval
(SIGIR ’19), July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 4 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331300

1

INTRODUCTION

The overload of information in social media streams makes it difficult for users to obtain a comprehensive account of different emerging events reported by users. The ability to identify and summarize
relevant information about newsworthy topics that are accounted
for by users in social media can be of great use to society. This is
particularly true in the case of high impact and breaking news, like
natural disasters and crisis situations [1]. In general, social media
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France
© 2019 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6172-9/19/07. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331300

1 https://twitter.com

1049

(Accessed: Feb 19, 2019)

Short Research Papers 2B: Recommendation and Evaluation

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

u1

m2

m3

u2

m4

m5

u3

m6

m7

m9

Figure 1: Example representation of messages. Messages m 1
and m 4 shares URLs u 1 and u 2 , while m 2 only shares u 1 ; m 8
and m 9 share or reply one to another. Each connected component is a document.

(1) We present a novel compact representation for news event
information in microblogs, based on shared URLs. This representation reduces data volume.
(2) We study the usefulness of our representation through three
case studies. We do so by introducing a methodology to represent news events in Twitter and find sub-topics. We show
that our approach displays comparable performance to baseline methods at a fraction of the computational resources.

2

m8

m1

observed that our representation reduces the amount of records
needed to describe an event by one order of magnitude, compared
to using the raw tweets. We were also able to identify sub-topics
by clustering the documents using dense word representations,
such as neural network–based word embeddings. We show that the
clustering based sub-topic detection task using our proposed representation yields similar external quality metrics to those obtained
using the entire data. Hence, indicating that we are preserving
relevant aspects of the information while considerably reducing
running time. In summary, our contributions are the following:

3

EVENT REPRESENTATION

We introduce our model and the methodology for applying it to
messages that describe events in social media.
Our model is based on the assumption that most of the social
media posts that discuss a specific event and contain a URL, are
messages that cover a particular portion or sub-topic of the event.
For example, in the case of an earthquake, tweets that refer to
damages to buildings may share a URL to an external news report;
similarly, a tweet that discusses the magnitude of the event may
link to the official seismological report. We define an event as a
tuple E = (M, U ), where M is the set of messages that discuss a realworld occurrence, and U is the set of topic-specific URLs that are
mentioned or shared by messages in M. We denote the URLs U as
topic-specific, assuming that each URL in U identifies only one of the
different topics within the real-world event. Our representation is a
graph G = (V , E), where V ⊆ M ∪ U is the set of nodes, comprised
of messages and URLs, and there is an edge (i, j) ∈ E if at least one
of the following conditions hold: (1) m = i is a message and u = j
is a URL and m shares u, (2) m 1 = i and m 2 = j are messages and
m 1 re-shares m 2 , or (3) m 1 = i and m 2 = j are messages and m 1
replies to m 2 (see an example in Figure 1). Finally, a document is a
connected component of G. In this case, a document is defined as a
collection of messages that discuss only one aspect of the event.
The assumption of U to be a set of topic-specific URLs may
not hold in all cases, for example, for URLs that address general
aspects of an event (e.g., a summary report of an entire event), or
that are generic (e.g., refer to a online news website’s root URL),
or irrelevant to the event (e.g., spam, or unrelated information).
We deal with these cases in our methodology for generating event
models, presented below. In that sense, our model and methodology
focus on identifying URLs that are specific to one aspect of an event,
and use those URLs to aggregate similar messages. Our goal is to
represent underlying sub-topics of an event by just using shared
URLs. Please refer to the poster for more examples2 .
Given a set of event-related social media messages, we propose
the following methodology for representation generation:
Filter out generic URLs: We identify generic URLs (too general
with respect to the event) as those that co-occur with several different other URLs in the same messages. Highly connected URLs
do not contribute to specific topics: links that are very generic (e.g.,
cnn.com) or very general to the event (e.g., general reports). All
of the messages mentioning these URLs would fall into the same
component, regardless of their differences in content. We removed

RELATED WORK

Two lines of research are relevant to our work: the utility of anchor
texts in microblogs and topic detection methods using different
aggregation strategies.
About the usefulness of anchor texts on Twitter, Raux et al. [11]
used anchor texts from tweets pointing to a predefined set of URLs
to characterize general topics, by clustering a bipartite graph of
words and URLs. We instead focus on news events, and tweets
related to these news, which have their own particularities, in
contrast to long lasting general topics. Mishne and Lin [9] studied
the contribution of anchor texts compared to the text of the websites
behind the URLs, concluding that anchor text add new terms not
seen in the website content, by looking also at the conversations
around the sharing tweets. Alonso et al. [2] had similar findings
examining Facebook posts. In another work by Alonso et al. [3],
the authors designed a social search engine using the propagation
of shared URLs as cues to measure virality, and anchor texts to
augment metadata of the search results with social content. In a
previous work [10], we showed a proof of concept of automatic
summarization of documents using anchor texts.
Topic modeling of tweets is an active line of research, and there
are some studies which investigate the effectiveness of aggregation
of tweets to improve topic detection [4, 6, 8]. Hong and Davison [6]
analyzed the effects of different aggregation strategies of tweets
when finding topics with Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA). They
found that some schemes yield better results at some tasks, such as
classification problems related to tweets. In a similar fashion, Mehrotra et al. [8] observed that aggregating hashtags (also described as
pooling of tweets by hashtags) is a more effective strategy to identify topics from tweets, but at the cost of longer running times due
to the duplication of tweets. Finally, Alvarez-Melis and Saveski [4]
found that adding the threads of conversation into the pooling
is more effective than pooling by hashtag in their observations.
We instead aggregate by shared URLs and conversations, with the
goal of generating a compact representation without major loss of
information.

2 https://users.dcc.uchile.cl/~mquezada/papers/sigir2019_poster.pdf

1050

Short Research Papers 2B: Recommendation and Evaluation

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

4.3

URLs that co-occurred with three or more different URLs across
messages. This threshold yielded the best results in our case studies.
Representation generation: The generation step consists of grouping messages that end up in the same component, as described
in the previous section. For that, a straightforward method is to
compute all pairs of messages and pairs of URLs and messages that
fulfill the conditions stated in the representation definition and
then find connected components using a union-find algorithm. The
URLs are the non-generic ones identified in the previous step, as
an approximation to the topic-specific URLs.
Vector representation of documents: Finally, we aggregate messages into documents in order to produce a vector representation,
using neural network-based word embeddings. This procedure generates dense document representations.

4

CASE STUDIES

We describe the case studies, the data, and the experiment we
performed to validate our representation.

4.1

Datasets

For the case studies, we selected three events from the data made
available by Kalyanam et al. [7]. Namely, a terrorist attack (2015
Libya Hotel Attack), a long-lasting event (2014 Oscar Pistorius Trial),
and a natural disaster (2015 Nepal Earthquake). We report duration
in days (corresponding to the amount of days encompassing at least
95% of the tweets), total tweets, retweets, and unique resolved URLs
(Table 2). We also show example tweets (Table 1).

4.2

Validation of sub-topic detection task

To validate our representation in the case studies, we identified
topics in our events using our representation and using raw tweets.
Sixteen people –mainly Computer Science undergrad and grad
students– labeled tweets independently using a custom Web interface to produce a ground-truth. The interface displayed a tweet and
a list of labels, and each user could assign one or more labels to a
tweet, mark the tweet as non relevant, or skip it. Some tweets may
refer to more than one sub-topic, and we preferred that users felt
free to assign as many labels as they prefer. We imposed a limit
of three evaluations per tweet. We manually generated the list of
labels by looking into news reports in the Web. The tweets were
chosen in such a way that there were roughly no underrepresented
sub-topics. For this, we manually produced a list of keywords for
each label, and for each label ranked the tweets using Okapi BM25;
in the interface, a random label was chosen and the corresponding
ranked tweet was presented. Finally, to assign a ground-truth label
to a tweet, we selected the label users chose the most. This resulted
in 401 labeled tweets (1339 labels in total) for the Libya event, 368
(531 labels) for Nepal, and 85 (362 labels) for Pistorius.
As our goal is to compare event representations, we chose kmeans as a simple baseline to validate the effectiveness of our
model. To find sub-topics, we ran k-means with different numbers of
clusters, using our representation and raw tweets. For the baseline,
we considered each tweet as a document, that is, we computed
the sum of word vectors for each tweet individually. We report
normalized mutual information, purity, and entropy for each event,
using the available labels in both settings (Figure 2). Note that the
measures were done only on the labeled tweets, that is, as if the
unlabeled tweets did not exist in the clustering solution.
We observe that with our representation, the clustering outperforms the baseline in most cases. In the case of the Nepal event,
our representation had better purity, NMI and entropy. In the case
of Pistorius, the measures are very similar. However, in the case
of Libya, our representation matches the baseline after a certain
number of clusters, except in the entropy measure. We believe this
is because the Libya event has more unrelated (spam and irrelevant)
tweets, and the model captures more information about unrelated
topics, as they use more URLs. And in terms of running time, we
observed that k-means under the representation runs one order of
magnitude faster than the baseline (Figure 3). These results suggest
that our representation is capable of preserving topical information
about the target event, with reduced time required to identify this
kind of information.

Experimental setting

To generate the representation for each event, we discarded all
tweets that have more than two URLs or more than three hashtags,
as we consider them as potential spam tweets. We resolved every
shortened URL mentioned in the tweets by following redirects.
Even though the tweet meta-data may include the URLs as before
they were shortened by the Twitter platform, they are often shortened by additional external services (e.g., bit.ly) even more than
once. Also, we removed all query strings from the URLs, with some
exceptions, which for some sites they are relevant for identifying
the resource (e.g., ?id=, ?fbid=, ?v=, etc.).
We discarded all URLs that co-occurred with 3 or more other
URLs in the same tweets. Then, we computed the representation
for each event by identifying connected components in the graph
of tweets and URLs, considering only components with URLs. This
resulted in 2 957 documents for the Libya event, 20 984 for the Nepal
event, and 9 092 for the Pistorius event.
We used fastText [5] to produce dense vectors from the documents. We choose fastText due to its capability to encode subword information into the embeddings and to encode some outof-vocabulary words, resulting in better quality embeddings for
rare or uncommon words. For the generation of document vectors,
we took all the tweets in a document, and obtained the vector of
each word in each tweet. Then, we took the sum of the vectors
of the words in the document. We trained 300-dimension word
embeddings using the dataset of Kalyanam et al. [7] consisting of
of 193 million event-related tweets (3 billion words). Note that the
training of vectors can be done off-line and is done only once.

5

DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK

Our proposed representation allows us to identify sub-topics in an
event much faster than traditional or off-the-self methods. However,
there is room for improvement in terms of the results. For this,
we need to perform a large scale evaluation, although it is hard
to find ground truth data for large, raw, uncurated social media
messages [2]. For this case scenario, our methodology aims to help
processing large quantities of noisy, un-curated data around news
events more effectively. In future work we are interested in studying
how to formally define and identify topic-specific URLs in the
events, which we believe are key to creating a useful representation.

1051

Short Research Papers 2B: Recommendation and Evaluation

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

Table 1: Sample tweets for each event.
Event

Sample tweets

Libya Hotel Attack

Gunmen possibly linked to Islamic State attack hotel popular with foreigners in Libyan capital Tripoli -officials <URL>
#Libya forces surround luxury hotel in #Tripoli where gunmen have taken hostages after car bomb attack - Reuters/AP

Oscar Pistorius Trial

Oscar Pistorius pleads not guilty Monday to all 4 charges against him, marking start of Olympian’s murder trial. <URL>
RT <mention>: Oscar Pistorius murder trial set to begin in South Africa: <URL>

Nepal Earthquake

Buildings down & roads out after major 7.5 magnitude earthquake hits #Nepal. Quake could be felt as far as Delhi <URL>
BREAKING: 15-year-old girl dead near Nepal border after quake brings house wall down, reports Reuters. Read more: <URL>

purity

libya
0.9

baseline

0.8

model

nepal

Table 2: Datasets for case studies.

pistorius

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
5

10

15

20

25

30

35

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

5

10

15

20

25

30

Name

Duration

Tweets

Retweets

URLs

Libya Hotel Attack
Nepal Earthquake
Oscar Pistorius Trial

8 days
1 day
70 days

28 616
522 434
113 189

12 280 (43%)
363 102 (70%)
26 307 (23%)

3 385
22 661
9 335

35

number of clusters

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

(a) Purity.
libya

nepal

This work was supported by the Millennium Institute for Foundational Research on Data (IMFD). M. Quezada was also supported
by CONICYT PCHA/Doctorado Nacional 2015/21151445.

pistorius

baseline

nmi

0.6

model

0.4

REFERENCES
[1] Firoj Alam, Ferda Ofli, and Muhammad Imran. 2018. CrisisMMD: Multimodal
Twitter Datasets from Natural Disasters. International AAAI Conference on Web
and Social Media (2018).
[2] Omar Alonso, Sushma Bannur, Kartikay Khandelwal, and Shankar Kalyanaraman.
2015. The World Conversation: Web Page Metadata Generation From Social
Sources. In Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on World Wide Web
(WWW ’15 Companion). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 385–395.
[3] Omar Alonso, Vasileios Kandylas, Serge-Eric Tremblay, Jake M. Hofman, and
Siddhartha Sen. 2017. What’s Happening and What Happened: Searching the
Social Web. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on Web Science Conference (WebSci
’17). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 191–200.
[4] David Alvarez-Melis and Martin Saveski. 2016. Topic Modeling in Twitter:
Aggregating Tweets by Conversations. ICWSM 2016 (2016), 519–522.
[5] Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin, and Tomas Mikolov. 2016.
Enriching Word Vectors with Subword Information. CoRR abs/1607.04606 (2016).
arXiv:1607.04606
[6] Liangjie Hong and Brian D. Davison. 2010. Empirical Study of Topic Modeling
in Twitter. In Proceedings of the First Workshop on Social Media Analytics (SOMA
’10). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 80–88.
[7] Janani Kalyanam, Mauricio Quezada, Barbara Poblete, and Gert Lanckriet. 2016.
Prediction and characterization of high-activity events in social media triggered
by real-world news. PloS one 11, 12 (2016), e0166694.
[8] Rishabh Mehrotra, Scott Sanner, Wray Buntine, and Lexing Xie. 2013. Improving
LDA Topic Models for Microblogs via Tweet Pooling and Automatic Labeling.
In Proceedings of the 36th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’13). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
889–892.
[9] Gilad Mishne and Jimmy Lin. 2012. Twanchor Text: A Preliminary Study of the
Value of Tweets As Anchor Text. In Proceedings of the 35th International ACM
SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR
’12). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1159–1160.
[10] Mauricio Quezada and Barbara Poblete. 2013. Understanding Real-World Events
via Multimedia Summaries Based on Social Indicators. In Collaboration and
Technology. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 18–25.
[11] Stéphane Raux, Nils Grünwald, and Christophe Prieur. 2011. Describing the Web
in less than 140 Characters. International AAAI Conference on Web and Social
Media (2011).
[12] Hernan Sarmiento, Barbara Poblete, and Jaime Campos. 2018. DomainIndependent Detection of Emergency Situations Based on Social Activity Related
to Geolocations. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM Conference on Web Science (WebSci
’18). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 245–254.

0.2
5

10

15

20

25

30

35

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

30

35

number of clusters

(b) Normalized Mutual Information.
libya

nepal

pistorius

baseline

entropy

1.00

model

0.75
0.50
0.25
5

10

15

20

25

30

35

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

5

10

15

20

25

number of clusters

(c) Entropy.

Figure 2: External clustering measures for target events.

time (seconds)

1000

●

Baseline − Libya
Model − Libya

100

10

● ● ●
● ● ● ● ●
● ● ● ●
● ● ● ●
● ● ●
● ● ● ●
● ● ●
●
●
●
● ●

Baseline − Nepal
Model − Nepal
Baseline − Pistorius
Model − Pistorius

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

number of clusters

Figure 3: Running times for clustering.

1052

