Workshop

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

ROME 2019: Workshop on Reducing Online Misinformation
Exposure
Guillaume Bouchard
Facebook
London, UK
gbouchar@fb.com

Guido Caldarelli

IMT School for Advanced Studies
Lucca
Lucca, Italy
Guido.Caldarelli@imtlucca.it

Facebook
London, UK
vplachouras@fb.com

writing the corresponding analysis can take from several hours in
the best case to days [4].
Improving the efficiency of fact-checking by providing tools
to automate parts of the process [3], or defining other processes
for validating the veracity of claims made in online social media,
are challenging problems with real impact on society, requiring an
interdisciplinary approach to address them. ROME 2019 will provide
a space for researchers to discuss these problems and to define
new directions for work on automating fact checking, reducing
misinformation online, and making social media more resilient to
the spread of false news.

ABSTRACT
The spread of misinformation online is a challenge that may have an
impact on society by misleading and undermining the trust of people in domains such as politics or public health. While fact-checking
is one way to identify misinformation, it is a slow process and requires significant effort. Improving the efficiency of fact-checking
by automating parts of the process or defining new processes to
validate claims is a challenging task with a need for expertise from
multiple disciplines. The aim of ROME 2019 is to bring together
researchers from various fields such as Information Retrieval, Natural Language Processing, Semantic Web and Complex Networks
to discuss these problems and define new directions in the area of
automated fact-checking.

2
KEYWORDS

PURPOSE OF WORKSHOP

The workshop aims to bring together experts from fields such as
Information Retrieval (IR), Natural Language Processing (NLP),
Semantic Web (SW), and Complex Networks (CN), as well as journalism and fact-checking organizations, to create a forum that will
foster collaboration and discussion with the end goal of advancing
the state-of-the-art in understanding and reducing misinformation
online. The workshop will also provide an opportunity for young researchers to meet experts in this cross-disciplinary area of research
and to learn from their expertise, leading to new research ideas. We
aim to make ROME 2019 the first one in a series of workshops that
bring together experts from diverse fields to focus on the area of
online misinformation.

Misinformation; fact-checking; false news detection
ACM Reference Format:
Guillaume Bouchard, Guido Caldarelli, and Vassilis Plachouras. 2019. ROME
2019: Workshop on Reducing Online Misinformation Exposure. In Proceedings of the 42nd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’19), July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 3 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331645

1

Vassilis Plachouras

MOTIVATION

The spread of misinformation online undermines the trust of people
and there is a global awareness that it may have repercussions on
society. For example, sharing of news can lead to polarizing the
public discourse ahead of important events, such as elections [1]. In
addition, low quality and misleading health information can hinder
public health efforts to prevent the spread of diseases [5].
To reduce the exposure of people to misinformation online, factcheckers manually verify the veracity of claims made in content
shared online [2]. However, fact-checking is a slow process involving significant manual and intellectual effort to find trustworthy and
reliable information. A fact-checker may have to look for evidence
from trustworthy sources and interpret the available information
in order to reach a conclusion. Fact checking a single claim and

2.1

Topics of Interest

We solicit submissions of research papers on computational factchecking, false news detection, and the analysis of misinformation
spread on social media. Topics of interest include, but are not limited
to:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6172-9/19/07.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331645

1426

Claim extraction/detection
Stance detection
Claim source detection
End-to-end evaluation of fact-checking
Supporting evidence retrieval
Quantifying and addressing biases in false news detection
Explainable models for computational fact checking
Software architectures for large scale false news detection
Provenance and source detection of claims
Analysis of the spread of misinformation
Crowd-sourcing for fact checking

Workshop

2.2

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

on this topic with Oxford University Press and he is now President
of the Complex System Society.
Vassilis Plachouras is a Research Scientist in Facebook AI Integrity, London, working on reducing the spread of misinformation online. Prior to that, he was a Software Engineer in Facebook
Search. Before joining Facebook, he was a Senior Research Scientist
at Thomson Reuters. He has more than 40 publications on IR and
related topics.

Related Workshops

Recently, there has been an increasing number of publications and
workshops on the topic of misinformation and false news in different communities. For example, the 1st Workshop on Fact Extraction
and Verification (FEVER) was collocated with EMNLP 20181 , and
the 2nd International Workshop on Rumours and Deception in
Social Media (RDSM)2 was collocated with CIKM 2018. The Web
Conference also had an Alternate Track on Journalism, Misinformation, and Fact Checking in 20183 and a workshop on misinformation
in 20194 . However, there has not been any event on the topic with
a focus on information retrieval. More importantly, ROME 2019
will be the first one to bring together the main communities that
we are targeting: IR, NLP, SW, and Complex Networks. SIGIR is
the top venue gathering experts in Information Retrieval and has
significant overlap with NLP and SW. It also has a long history
of significant contributions in the area of evaluation and data set
creation, which makes it a suitable venue for addressing topics such
as end-to-end evaluation of systems and data set generation for
tasks related to misinformation and fact-checking.

3

4.2

Steering Committee

The challenging problems associated with identifying false news
and reducing their spread online can be better addressed by a community of researchers from academia and industry. To facilitate the
creation of such community, our intention is for this first workshop
to evolve into a forum that will be taking place on a regular basis
at relevant conferences. To guide this process and facilitate the creation of such a community, we have formed a steering committee
with Filippo Menczer (Indiana University, US) and Fabrizio Silvestri
(Facebook, UK).
Filippo Menczer is a professor of informatics and computer science at Indiana University, Bloomington, with courtesy appointments in cognitive science and physics. He holds a Laurea in Physics
from the Sapienza University of Rome and a Ph.D. in Computer
Science and Cognitive Science from the University of California,
San Diego. Dr. Menczer is an ACM Distinguished Scientist, a Fellow
of the Center for Computer-Mediated Communication, a Senior
Research Fellow of The Kinsey Institute, and a board member of
the IU Network Science Institute. He previously served as division
chair in the IUB School of Informatics and Computing, director of
the Center for Complex Networks and Systems Research, visiting
scientist at Yahoo Research, Fellow of the Institute for Scientific
Interchange Foundation in Torino, Italy, and Fellow-at-large of the
Santa Fe Institute. His research focuses on Web and data science,
social network analysis, social computation, Web mining, and modeling of complex information networks. His work on the spread of
information and misinformation in social media has been covered
in many US and international news sources. Menczer received multiple ACM service awards and currently serves as associate editor
of the Network Science journal and on the editorial boards of EPJ
Data Science and PeerJ Computer Science.
Fabrizio Silvestri is a internationally recognized expert in Information Retrieval, with more than 150 publications in various areas
of IR, Search, and Machine Learning. He is member of the Senior
PC of various top-tier conferences including SIGIR and he has organized various workshops at various top conferences — including
SIGIR, during his career. Fabrizio is currently working on developing novel IR and ML techniques to reduce misinformation online.
Prior to that Fabrizio was a Software Engineer for Facebook Search.
Prior to Facebook, he has been a Principal Research Scientist at
Yahoo Research and a researcher at ISTI-CNR, Pisa, Italy

FORMAT AND PLANNED ACTIVITIES

ROME2019 will be a full day workshop. The workshop will have
three invited speakers from diverse backgrounds: Kalina Bontcheva,
a professor in Text Analysis from the University of Sheffield, Rocco
di Nicola, who is a professor of Computer Science at IMT Lucca
and whose research is focused on the foundations of distributed
computing, and Gianni Riota, a journalist, former editor in chief of
the financial newspaper Il Sole 24 Ore and the news bulletin TG1,
and Pirelli visiting professor of Italian studies in the Department of
French and Italian at Princeton University.
There will be oral presentations for a selection of the accepted
submissions as well as a poster session, which will serve as a way
to facilitate conversations among the workshop participants. The
workshop will close with a panel discussion on the spread of misinformation and ways to reduce it.

4 WORKSHOP ORGANIZATION
4.1 Organizers
Guillaume Bouchard is Research Manager in Facebook AI Integrity
group, with the primary goal of reducing misinformation using AI
techniques. He authored more than 60 publications in international
venues and 50 patents. He received his PhD in Applied Statistics
from INRIA in 2005, was senior research scientist for Xerox Research Centre, France and UCL, UK. He was Founder and CEO
of Bloomsbury AI, a NLP startup developing question-answering
systems in natural language.
Guido Caldarelli is full professor in Theoretical Physics at IMT
Lucca. He got is PhD in Theory of Condensed Matter at SISSA
in 1996. He worked on the theory of Self-Similar Phenomena as
Fractals and Developed the field of Complex Networks from first
papers in 2000. He published 200 papers and a number of textbooks

4.3

Programme Committee

Below, we list the members of the programme committee who
agreed to participate in the reviewing process for the workshop.
We plan to have three reviews for each submission to the workshop.

1 http://fever.ai/2018/workshop.html
2 https://bit.ly/2KaHUu7

3 https://www2018.thewebconf.org/program/misinfoweb/

• Luca Maria Aiello, Nokia Bell Labs

4 https://sites.google.com/view/misinfoworkshop

1427

Workshop

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

• Svitlana Volkova, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
• Marcos Zampieri, University of Wolverhampton
• Arkaitz Zubiaga, University of Warwick

Aristides Gionis, Aalto University
Joemon Jose, University of Glasgow
Udo Kruschwitz, University of Essex
Julien Leblay, Artificial Intelligence Research Center
Kyumin Lee, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
Maria Liakata, University of Warwick
Huan Liu, Arizona State University
Ioana Manolescu, INRIA Saclay
Pushkar Mishra, Facebook
Preslav Nakov, Qatar Computing Research Institute
Symeon Papadopoulos, ITI-CERTH
Aleksandra Piktus, Facebook
Kashyap Popat, Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Antonio Scala, Institute for Complex Systems, CNR
Kai Shu, Arizona State University
Sumithra Velupillai, KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Andreas Vlachos, University of Cambridge

REFERENCES
[1] Yochai Benkler, Robert Faris, and Hal Roberts. 2018. Network Propaganda: Manipulation, Disinformation, and Radicalization in American Politics. Oxford University
Press.
[2] Lucas Graves. 2016. Deciding What’s True: The Rise of Political Fact-Checking in
American Journalism. Columbia University Press.
[3] Lev Konstantinovskiy, Oliver Price, Mevan Babakar, and Arkaitz Zubiaga. 2018.
Towards Automated Factchecking: Developing an Annotation Schema and Benchmark for Consistent Automated Claim Detection. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Fact Extraction and VERification (FEVER). Brussels, Belgium.
[4] Yvonne Rolzhausen. 2018. How to fact check the Atlantic. https://www.
theatlantic.com/notes/2018/01/how-to-fact-check-the-atlantic/551477/. (2018).
[Online; accessed May 25, 2019].
[5] Silvia Sommariva, Cheryl Vamos, Alexios Mantzarlis, Lillie Uyên-Loan Ðào, and
Dinorah Martinez Tyson. 2018. Spreading the (Fake) News: Exploring Health
Messages on Social Media and the Implications for Health Professionals Using a
Case Study. American Journal of Health Education 49, 4 (2018), 246–255. https:
//doi.org/10.1080/19325037.2018.1473178

1428

