Tutorial

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

Example-based Search: a New Frontier for Exploratory Search
Matteo Lissandrini
Aalborg University
matteo@cs.aau.dk

Davide Mottin

Aarhus University
davide@cs.au.dk

Utrecht University
i.velegrakis@uu.nl

Interface

Exploration is one of the primordial ways to accrue knowledge
about the world and its nature. As we accumulate, mostly automatically, data at unprecedented volumes and speed, our datasets
have become complex and hard to understand. In this context, exploratory search provides a handy tool for progressively gather the
necessary knowledge by starting from a tentative query that can
provide cues about the next queries to issue. An exploratory query
should be simple enough to avoid complicate declarative languages
(such as SQL) and convoluted mechanism, and at the same time retain the flexibility and expressiveness required to express complex
information needs. Recently, we have witnessed a rediscovery of the
so called example-based methods, in which the user, or the analyst
circumvent query languages by using examples as input. This shift
in semantics has led to a number of methods receiving as query
a set of example members of the answer set. The search system
then infers the entire answer set based on the given examples and
any additional information provided by the underlying database.
In this tutorial, we present an excursus over the main examplebased methods for exploratory analysis. We show how different
data types require different techniques, and present algorithms that
are specifically designed for relational, textual, and graph data. We
conclude by providing a unifying view of this query-paradigm and
identify new exciting research directions.

Example-based approaches
Middleware

Machine
learning

ABSTRACT

Data structures and hardware

Relational

Graph

Text

Figure 1: A view of example-based data exploration.
structured queries to the underlying database in order to progressively gather the required information. This assumption stems from
the intuition that the user is accustomed to data analysis techniques.
Yet, very often, this assumption is not true.
Recently, examples became a popular proxy for data exploration.
Examples avoid the need for complex query languages. One of the
earliest attempts to bring examples as a query method is queryby-example [26]. The main idea was to help the user in the query
formulation, allowing them to specify the results in terms of templates for tuples. Nowadays, examples are not anymore a mere
template for relational queries, but rather the representative of the
intended results the user would like to have. These example-based
approaches are fundamentally different from the initial query-byexample idea, and are successfully applied not only to relational
data [5, 23], but also to textual [2, 25], and graph [10, 16] data as
well.
We note that the flexibility examples provide does not compromise the richness of the results, yet, it can overcome the ambiguity
of generic keyword searches, which are frequently found in information retrieval. On the other hand, while data exploration
techniques assume the user is willing to pose several exploratory
queries, the use of examples allows the searcher to provide more information with less effort, making example-based methods a more
palatable choice for novice users, as well as for practitioners. This
new functionality can empower existing information retrieval systems with a complementary tool: whenever a query is too complex
to be expressed with detailed set of conditions, examples represent
a natural alternative. In this respect (cfr. Figure 1) example-based
exploration is a middle ground between the user interface, and the
data-management layer, enabling new functionalities for the former
and allowing more natural exploitation of the latter. Moreover, the
use of examples has been demonstrated to be very effective in visual
query interfaces [13]. Here we demonstrate how example-based
methods can be employed as an expressive and powerful method
for exploratory search systems.

ACM Reference Format:
Matteo Lissandrini, Davide Mottin, Themis Palpanas, and Yannis Velegrakis.
2019. Example-based Search: a New Frontier for Exploratory Search. In 42nd
Int’l ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval (SIGIR ’19), July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France. ACM, New York, NY,
USA, Article 2, 2 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331387

1

Yannis Velegrakis

Themis Palpanas

Paris Descartes University
themis@mi.parisdescartes.fr

MOTIVATION

Exploratory search includes methods to efficiently extract knowledge from data repositories, even if we do not know what exactly
we are looking for, nor how to precisely describe our needs [24].
The need for new and effective exploratory search methods is particularly relevant given the current abundance and richness of today’s
large datasets. In common exploratory settings, the user progressively acquires the knowledge by issuing a sequence of generic
queries to gather intelligence about the data. However, the existing
body of work in data analysis, data visualization, and predictive
models, assumes the user is willing to pose several well defined or
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6172-9/19/07.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331387

2

TUTORIAL OUTLINE

In this tutorial, we provide a detailed overview of the new area
of example-based methods for exploratory search, surveying the
relevant state-of-the-art techniques. Moreover, we present future
directions discussing various machine learning techniques used to

1411

Tutorial

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

infer user preferences in an online fashion. All the materials are
freely available at https://data-exploration.ml.

2.1

internal preference model. One of the earliest work in this direction
is MindReader [9] in which the user specifies a set of tuples and
optional relevance scores and the system infers a distance function
on the objects in the database. The exploration of such relevance
learning or metric learning approaches form the basis of interactive
exploratory systems. Moreover, the study of Gaussian Processes
as a mean of interactively learning any function given a set of
points from the user has recently found applications in graphs [14].
Therefore, we will present a body of work that takes the machine
learning perspective into account. The research in this area is still
at its infancy and forms a fertile ground for a new generation of
data management systems.

Example-based approaches

We survey the main approaches for exploratory queries, highlighting the main differences among data models, and presenting indepth insights of the current status of research in this area. We first
introduce query-by-example [26] as a first attempt to simplify query
formulation. In query-by-example the user, instead of explicitly typing a query, specifies the shape of the results in a tabular fashion.
We present the main body of work within relational, textual, and
graph data.
For relational data we provide an overview of techniques that
solve various tasks using examples. We show how from examples
we can infer fully specified SQL queries through reverse engineering [18, 23]. This very active area has reached maturity discovering
both approximate and exact queries with different expressiveness
and SQL operators. The use of examples is also beneficial in more
complex tasks, such as data integration via schema mapping [1].
More recently, example-based approaches have been used for data
cleaning by finding duplicate entities [21] or cleaning rules [8]. Last,
we present prototype systems that build upon examples, such as
Bleau [19] and QPlain [3].

REFERENCES
[1] Angela Bonifati, Ugo Comignani, Emmanuel Coquery, and Romuald Thion. 2017.
Interactive Mapping Specification with Exemplar Tuples. In SIGMOD.
[2] Ilaria Bordino, Gianmarco De Francisci Morales, Ingmar Weber, and Francesco
Bonchi. 2013. From machu_picchu to rafting the urubamba river: anticipating
information needs via the entity-query graph. In WSDM.
[3] D. Deutch and A. Gilad. 2016. QPlain: Query by explanation. In ICDE.
[4] Gonzalo Diaz, Marcelo Arenas, and Michael Benedikt. 2016. SPARQLByE: Querying RDF data by example. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 9, 13 (2016).
[5] Kyriaki Dimitriadou, Olga Papaemmanouil, and Yanlei Diao. 2014. Explore-byexample: An automatic query steering framework for interactive data exploration.
In SIGMOD. ACM.
[6] Aristides Gionis, Michael Mathioudakis, and Antti Ukkonen. 2015. Bump hunting
in the dark: Local discrepancy maximization on graphs. In ICDE. 1155–1166.
[7] Maeda F Hanafi, Azza Abouzied, Laura Chiticariu, and Yunyao Li. 2017. Synthesizing Extraction Rules from User Examples with SEER. In SIGMOD.
[8] Jian He, Enzo Veltri, Donatello Santoro, Guoliang Li, Giansalvatore Mecca, Paolo
Papotti, and Nan Tang. 2016. Interactive and deterministic data cleaning. In
SIGMOD.
[9] Yoshiharu Ishikawa, Ravishankar Subramanya, and Christos Faloutsos. 1998.
MindReader: Querying databases through multiple examples. In VLDB.
[10] Nandish Jayaram, Arijit Khan, Chengkai Li, Xifeng Yan, and Ramez Elmasri. 2015.
Querying knowledge graphs by example entity tuples. TKDE 27, 10 (2015).
[11] Isabel M Kloumann and Jon M Kleinberg. 2014. Community membership identification from small seed sets. In KDD.
[12] Matteo Lissandrini, Davide Mottin, Themis Palpanas, and Yannis Velegrakis. 2018.
Multi-Example Search in Rich Information Graphs. In ICDE.
[13] Matteo Lissandrini, Davide Mottin, Themis Palpanas, and Yannis Velegrakis. 2018.
X2Q: Your Personal Example-based Graph Explorer. In PVLDB. ACM, 901–904.
[14] Yifei Ma, Tzu-Kuo Huang, and Jeff G Schneider. 2015. Active Search and Bandits
on Graphs using Sigma-Optimality. In UAI. 542–551.
[15] Davide Mottin, Matteo Lissandrini, Yannis Velegrakis, and Themis Palpanas. 2014.
Searching with xq: the exemplar query search engine. In SIGMOD. ACM.
[16] Davide Mottin, Matteo Lissandrini, Yannis Velegrakis, and Themis Palpanas. 2016.
Exemplar queries: a new way of searching. VLDB J. (2016).
[17] Bryan Perozzi, Leman Akoglu, Patricia Iglesias Sánchez, and Emmanuel Müller.
2014. Focused clustering and outlier detection in large attributed graphs. In KDD.
1346–1355.
[18] Fotis Psallidas, Bolin Ding, Kaushik Chakrabarti, and Surajit Chaudhuri. 2015. S4:
Top-k Spreadsheet-Style Search for Query Discovery. In SIGMOD. 2001–2016.
[19] Thibault Sellam and Martin Kersten. 2016. Cluster-driven navigation of the query
space. TKDE 28, 5 (2016).
[20] Rishabh Singh. 2016. Blinkfill: Semi-supervised programming by example for
syntactic string transformations. PVLDB 9, 10 (2016).
[21] Rohit Singh, Venkata Vamsikrishna Meduri, Ahmed Elmagarmid, Samuel Madden,
Paolo Papotti, Jorge-Arnulfo Quiané-Ruiz, Armando Solar-Lezama, and Nan Tang.
2017. Synthesizing entity matching rules by examples. PVLDB 11, 2 (2017).
[22] Yu Su, Shengqi Yang, Huan Sun, Mudhakar Srivatsa, Sue Kase, Michelle Vanni,
and Xifeng Yan. 2015. Exploiting relevance feedback in knowledge graph search.
In KDD.
[23] Yaacov Y Weiss and Sara Cohen. 2017. Reverse Engineering SPJ-Queries from
Examples. In SIGMOD.
[24] Ryen W White and Resa A Roth. 2009. Exploratory search: Beyond the queryresponse paradigm. Synthesis lectures on information concepts, retrieval, and
services 1, 1 (2009).
[25] Mohamed Yakout, Kris Ganjam, Kaushik Chakrabarti, and Surajit Chaudhuri.
2012. InfoGather: Entity Augmentation and Attribute Discovery by Holistic
Matching with Web Tables. In SIGMOD.
[26] Moshé M. Zloof. 1975. Query by Example. In AFIPS NCC. 431–438.

For textual data the techniques include search approaches based
on documents used as representatives for the set of results [25],
and serendipitous search based on the current visited pages [2].
These approaches focus on documents as examples for retrieving
related information. Recently, examples has been successfully employed in entity extraction [7, 20], in which the user provides either
mentions of entities in a text [7], or tuples and similarities among
attributes [20], and the system automatically returns extraction
rules that can be applied to the given dataset.
For graph data there are two prominent approaches: the first
use subgraphs, or partially specified structures as input examples [4, 10, 12, 16], while the second focuses on the vertices of the
graph, which are used for making the selections [11, 17]. Structures
convey a more precise information and therefore can be used to
quickly prune the search space. Among the existing approaches Exemplar Queries [15, 16] and Graph Query by Example (GQBE) [10]
use subgraph isomorphism or structural similarities to identify
structures related to the one the user provided. A different approach is the reverse engineering of SPARQL queries [4] in which
the input is a set of positive and negative entity mentions in a RDF
dataset. Examples can also be employed for targeted analysis of
networks, in order to discover communities [11], dense regions [6],
or subspaces along outliers [17].

2.2

Machine learning with examples

Current techniques use ad-hoc notions of similarity to retrieve
results that are likely to be part of the solution of an unknown
query. The current development in machine learning and active
search [14, 22] present a different perspective: user preferences can
be learned from user interactions instead of manually crafted in
the system. Current hardware capabilities allow to process large
amount of data, and at the same time dynamically change the

1412

