Tutorial

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

SIGIR 2019 Tutorial on Explainable Recommendation and Search
Yongfeng Zhang

Department of Computer Science
Rutgers University
yongfeng.zhang@rutgers.edu

Jiaxin Mao

Department of Computer Science
Tsinghua University
maojiaxin@gmail.com

systems as blank-boxes for end users, and the lack of explainability
weakens the persuasiveness and trustworthiness of the system for
users, making explainable recommendation and search important
research issues to IR, RecSys, and the Web research communities.
In a broader sense, researchers in the broader artificial intelligence community have also realized the importance of Explainable
AI, which aims to address a wide range of AI explainability problems in deep learning, computer vision, automatic driving systems,
and natural language processing tasks. As an important branch of
AI research, this further highlights the importance and urgency for
our IR/RecSys/Web community to address the explainability issues
of various recommendation and search systems.
Recently, a series of AI regulations have entered into force, such
as the EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and The
California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018, which emphasize the
“principle of transparency” of intelligent algorithms, and imply the
“right to explanation” of algorithmic decisions. As an important
branch of AI research, this further highlights the importance and
urgency for our research community to discuss and address the explainability issues of various recommendation and search systems.
Breadth. The tutorial will cover two main topics, explainable
recommendation and explainable search. Both topics will start from
very early research efforts on recommendation and search systems,
such as user/item-based collaborative filtering methods, TF-IDF,
and BM25 models, so that we can prepare the audiences will proper
background and problem settings. The tutorial will then introduce a
sequence of efforts from the community on the explainability issues
of recommendation and search systems in a chronological order, so
that we can help the audience to understand how the research area
developed from 1980/1990s research pioneers to the most recent
research advances. We will also provide a taxonomy to classify different methods for better understanding. The tutorial will cover the
topics about how explainable and search techniques are applied in
real-world systems such as e-commerce (Amazon, Alibaba), search
engines (Google, Bing), and social networks (Facebook, Twitter).
Depth. State-of-the-art search and recommendation systems are
powered by different kinds of machine learning models to estimate
the relevance between queries and documents or users and items.
As these models become more sophisticated, it also becomes difficult
to understand how they actually work. Consequently, the lack of
explainability makes it difficult for system designers to debug and
improve the ranking models, or for end users to better access the
search/recommendation results so as to build trust in the system.
Therefore, some research efforts, albeit not necessarily under the
term explainable recommendation and search, have been put to
improve the explainability of recommendation and search systems.
In terms of explainable recommendation, we will introduce research efforts on Computer Human Interaction (CHI) that attempts
to understand the user behaviors in recommender systems so as

ABSTRACT
Explainable recommendation and search attempt to develop models
or methods that not only generate high-quality recommendation
or search results, but also intuitive explanations of the results for
users or system designers, which can help to improve the system
transparency, persuasiveness, trustworthiness, and effectiveness,
etc. This is even more important in personalized search and recommendation scenarios, where users would like to know why a
particular product, web page, news report, or friend suggestion
exists in his or her own search and recommendation lists. The
tutorial focuses on the research and application of explainable recommendation and search algorithms, as well as their application in
real-world systems such as search engine, e-commerce and social
networks. The tutorial aims at introducing and communicating
explainable recommendation and search methods to the community, as well as gathering researchers and practitioners interested in
this research direction for discussions, idea communications, and
research promotions.
ACM Reference Format:
Yongfeng Zhang, Jiaxin Mao, and Qingyao Ai. 2019. SIGIR 2019 Tutorial on
Explainable Recommendation and Search. In Proceedings of the 42nd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval (SIGIR ’19), July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France. ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 2 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331390

1

Qingyao Ai

College of Info. and Comp. Sciences
University of Massachusetts Amherst
aiqy@cs.umass.edu

MOTIVATION AND RELEVANCE

The tutorial will introduce the research and application of Explainable Recommendation and Search Systems, under the background
of Explainable AI in a more general sense. Early recommendation
and search systems adopted intuitive yet easily explainable models
to generate recommendation and search lists, such as user-based
and item-based collaborative filtering for recommendation, which
provide recommendations based on similar users or items, or TF-IDF
based retrieval models for search, which provide document ranking
lists according to word similarity between different documents.
However, state-of-the-art recommendation and search models
extensively rely on complex machine learning and latent representation models such as matrix factorization or even deep neural
networks, and they work with various types of information sources
such as ratings, text, images, audio or video signals. The complexity
nature of state-of-the-art models make search and recommendation
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6172-9/19/07.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331390

1417

Tutorial

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

to provide recommendation explanation. We will also introduce
research efforts on the explainability of recommendation models,
beginning from early-stage user/item-based collaborative filtering
methods and content-based methods, to matrix factorization based
methods, and to the recent deep learning-based approaches.
In terms of explainable search, we will introduce from both user
perspective and system designer perspective. In user perspective,
search system can be seen as a tool to access a huge information
repository, and users should have a correct mental model of the
system to know its capabilities and limitations. Based on research
efforts on user behavior analysis, we will introduce how to help
users understand why the search engine ranks particular documents at top positions. From system designer perspective, we will
introduce how and why ranking models such as learning to rank
and deep matching models output user-perceived relevances in the
way that they are supposed to, based on recent advances on feature
sensitive analysis and attention mechanisms.

2

product search/recommendation and learning to rank [1]. Before
his study in CIIR, he obtained his bachelor degree from Dept. Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, and finished
his undergraduate thesis project on click models in THUIR lab, advised by Prof. Yiqun Liu. He gave tutorials on “Unbiased Learning
to Rank: Theory and Practice” at ICTIR 2018 and CIKM 2018.

3

AUDIENCE AND MATERIALS

The tutorial will be mainly targeting on information retrieval and
recommendation system researchers and practitioners. Since we
will introduce how recent NLP and Knowledge base techniques
will help explainable recommendation and search, it may also attract NLP, Semantic, and Knowledge researchers. Since we will
also introduce how explainable recommendation and search are
applied in commercial real-world systems such as e-commerce,
search engine, and social networks, it may also attract industry
researchers and practitioners from different areas. For prerequisite,
basic understandings of information retrieval and recommendation
system knowledge will be preferred, but we will introduce the basic
concepts in the tutorial for better audience engagement. The the
tutorial slides and relevant papers in explainable recommendation
and search for the audiences are provided at the tutorial website1 .

BRIEF BIO OF ORGANIZERS

Yongfeng Zhang is an Assistant Professor in the Department of
Computer Science at Rutgers University (The State University of
New Jersey). His research interest is in Information Retrieval, Recommender Systems, Machine Learning, and Internet Economics.
In the previous he was a postdoc advised by Prof. W. Bruce Croft
in the Center for Intelligent Information Retrieval (CIIR) at UMass
Amherst, and did his PhD and BE in Computer Science at Tsinghua
University, with a BS in Economics at Peking Univeristy. He is a
Siebel Scholar of the class 2015, and a Baidu Scholar of the class
2014. He has been consistently working on explainable recommendation systems. His recent work on the explainability of search and
recommendation models include visually explainable recommendation, knowledge base embedding for explainable recommendation,
natural language generation for explainable recommendation, as
well as explainable product search in e-commerce [1–10, 12, 13].
He co-organized and served as the co-chair of the 1st International
Workshop on Explainable Recommendation and Search (EARS 2018)
co-located with SIGIR 2018. He has been teaching graduate classes
ever since the spring semester of 2017, and was awarded a Best Professor Award for Teaching and Mentoring by the Rutgers Computer
Science Graduate Student Society in the year of 2018.
Jiaxin Mao is a postdoc in the Department of Computer Science
and Technology of Tsinghua University, advised by Prof. Shaoping
Ma and Yiqun Liu. He focuses on user behavior analysis of search
engines and has expertise in utilizing user behavior signals to estimate their preference and satisfaction in Web Search and building
click models to extract unbiased relevance feedback in different
search contexts. He also served as a SIGIR student liaison for Asia
region from 2017 to 2018. He gave tutorials on “Unbiased Learning
to Rank: Theory and Practice” at ICTIR 2018 and CIKM 2018.
Qingyao Ai is a fifth year Ph.D student advised by Prof. W. Bruce
Croft in the Center for Intelligent Information Retrieval (CIIR),
College of Information and Computer Sciences, University of Massachusetts Amherst. His research mainly focuses on developing
intelligent retrieval systems with machine learning techniques.
He actively works on applying deep learning techniques on information retrieval problems including ad-hoc retrieval, explainable

4

PREVIOUS EDITIONS

This is the second edition of the Tutorial on Explainable Recommendation and Search. Before this we presented the tutorial on
WWW 2019 [11]. Prior to this, we have organized the first International Workshop on Explainable Recommendation and Search
(EARS 2018) co-located with SIGIR 2018 [14, 15]2 , which helps to
prepare a clear, well-organized and inspiring tutorial on this topic.

REFERENCES
[1] Q. Ai, V. Azizi, X. Chen, and Y. Zhang. 2018. Learning Heterogenous Knowledge
base Embeddings for Explainable Recommendation. Algorithms (2018).
[2] Xu Chen, Zheng Qin, Yongfeng Zhang, and Tao Xu. 2016. Learning to rank
features for recommendation over multiple categories. In SIGIR. ACM, 305–314.
[3] X. Chen, H. Xu, Y. Zhang, J. Tang, Y. Cao, H. Zha, and Z. Qin. 2018. Sequential
Recommendation with User Memory Networks. In WSDM. ACM.
[4] Xu Chen, Yongfeng Zhang, and Zheng Qin. 2019. Dynamic Explainable Recommendation based on Neural Attentive Models. AAAI (2019).
[5] Xu Chen, Yongfeng Zhang, Hongteng Xu, Yixin Cao, Zheng Qin, and Hongyuan
Zha. 2019. Visually Explainable Recommendation. SIGIR (2019).
[6] Y. Xian, Z. Fu, S. Muthukrishnan, G. de Melo, and Y. Zhang. 2019. Reinforcement
Knowledge Graph Reasoning for Explainable Recommendation. SIGIR (2019).
[7] Yongfeng Zhang. 2015. Incorporating phrase-level sentiment analysis on textual
reviews for personalized recommendation. In WSDM. ACM, 435–440.
[8] Yongfeng Zhang. 2017. Explainable Recommendation: Theory and Applications.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.06409 (2017).
[9] Yongfeng Zhang and Xu Chen. 2018. Explainable Recommendation: A Survey
and New Perspectives. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.11192 (2018).
[10] Y. Zhang, G. Lai, M. Zhang, et al. 2014. Explicit Factor Models for Explainable
Recommendation based on Phrase-level Sentiment Analysis. SIGIR (2014).
[11] Yongfeng Zhang, Jiaxin Mao, and Qingyao Ai. 2019. The Web Conference 2019
Tutorial on Explainable Recommendation and Search. WWW (2019).
[12] Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, et al. 2014. Do Users Rate or Review? Boost Phrase-level
Sentiment Labeling with Review-level Sentiment Classification. SIGIR (2014).
[13] Y. Zhang, M. Zhang, Y. Zhang, G. Lai, Y. Liu, et al. 2015. Daily-aware personalized
recommendation based on feature-level time series analysis. In WWW.
[14] Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, and M. Zhang. 2018. Report on EARS’18: 1st International
Workshop on ExplainAble Recommendation and Search. SIGIR Forum (2018).
[15] Yongfeng Zhang, Yi Zhang, and Min Zhang. 2018. SIGIR 2018 Workshop on
ExplainAble Recommendation and Search (EARS 2018). SIGIR (2018).
1 https://sites.google.com/view/ears-tutorial/
2 https://ears2018.github.io/

1418

