SIRIP 4: Legal IR

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

Find Relevant Cases in All Cases: Your Journey at Doctrine
Nicolas Fiorini
Doctrine
24 rue du Mail, 75002 Paris
nicolas.fiorini@doctrine.fr

ABSTRACT

BIOGRAPHY

Domain-specific Information Retrieval (IR) is generally
challenging because of the rare datasets or benchmarks, niche
vocabularies and more limited literature coverage. Legal IR is no
exception and presents other obstacles, reinforcing the need for
innovation and, sometimes, paradigm shifts.

Nicolas Fiorini is the Data Chapter Lead at Doctrine, where he is
responsible for the strategic vision and skillset of the Data
Science Chapter. He did a PhD in Computer Science at the
University of Montpellier and Ecole des Mines d’Alès, France,
focusing on generic approaches for indexing and clustering
documents annotated with knowledge base concepts. He then
joined the National Center for Biotechnology Information at the
National Institutes of Health to work on PubMed, where he
developed the “Best Match” algorithm — a relevance ranking
model for biomedical papers.

Doctrine, one of the largest Legaltech companies in Europe,
dedicates an entire data science team to advance on these
problems and identify new opportunities. In this presentation,
we provide some intuition regarding the specificities of legal IR
(e.g., what is relevance?), and we introduce some of the solutions
currently used on doctrine.fr.
Particularly, we show how we use named entity recognition in
the various forms of contents we host, and how it enhances the
search engine. With knowledge extracted from documents, we
may built large enough datasets and train learning-to-rank
algorithms. This, combined with several specific-domain
vocabulary enrichments to increase recall, dramatically improves
the search experience for our users.

CCS Concepts/ACM Classifiers
• Information systems~Retrieval models and ranking
• Information systems~Learning to rank
• Information systems~Structured text search
• Information systems~Data mining

Author Keywords: Legal IR; Learning-To-Rank

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party
components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the
Owner/Author.
SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France.
© 2019 Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6172-9/19/07.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331441

1393

