Short Research Papers 3B: Recommendation and Evaluation

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

On Anonymous Commenting: A Greedy Approach to Balance
Utilization and Anonymity for Instagram Users
Arian Askari

Asal Jalilvand

Mahmood Neshati

Faculty of Computer Science and
Engineering
Shahid Beheshti University, G.C.
ar.askari@mail.sbu.ac.ir

Faculty of Computer Science and
Engineering
Shahid Beheshti University, G.C.
a.jalilvand@sbu.ac.ir

Faculty of Computer Science and
Engineering
Shahid Beheshti University, G.C.
m_neshati@sbu.ac.ir

ABSTRACT

certain circumstances [4, 9]. When users use their real identity for
commenting, posting, etc. they feel a social pressure to conform to
the mainstream and fear not being accepted. Fear of sharing personal data may also root from discomfort and harassment caused by
other users. Therefore, the possibility to openly discuss one’s ideas
and opinions via anonymous comments is an important user requirement. Numerous queries regarding commenting without name
display have been queried in Google search engine (Fig. 1). Online
platforms, such as Instagram and Youtube, publicly utilize user comments for ranking and content recommendation; thus, anonymous
commenting may adversely affect their analysis mechanisms in
recommendation services. Yet users who are obliged to use their
real usernames for commenting may find their privacy threatened,
that is to say, there’s a conflict between user requirements (privacy
protection) and service provider requirements (data analysis). In
this paper, we are concerned with two forms of these analytics.
First, how many real users have positive or negative opinions on
a specific product which is an important analytic for marketers;
for instance, Zendesk 1 helps the marketers find out whether they
have "a lot of unique commenters, or one or two people commenting a lot"2 . Second, how many real users have the same positive
or negative opinion on two different products (i.e. correlation); a
real-life example
is Brand24 that lets file:///home/arian/Desktop/i...
the marketers know how their
Google
customers liked their different products, or how they feel about
similar products of different companies3 . Lack
of the former deSign in
ALL
IMAGES
prives service providers of users’ real opinion, and lack of the latter
makes product recommendation based on user activity difficult.

In many online services, anonymous commenting is not possible
for the users; therefore, the users can not express their critical
opinions without disregarding the consequences. As for now, naïve
approaches are available for anonymous commenting which cause
problems for analytical services on user comments. In this paper,
we explore anonymous commenting approaches and their pros and
cons. We also propose methods for anonymous commenting where
it’s possible to protect the user privacy while allowing sentimental
analytics for service providers. Our experiments were conducted on
a real dataset gathered from Instagram comments which indicate
the effectiveness of our proposed methods in privacy protection
and sentimental analytics. The proposed methods are independent
of a particular website and can be utilized in various domains.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Security and privacy → Privacy protections.

KEYWORDS
Anonymous commenting; User privacy; Provider utility; Privacyutility trade-off; Instagram
ACM Reference Format:
Arian Askari, Asal Jalilvand, and Mahmood Neshati. 2019. On Anonymous
Commenting: A Greedy Approach to Balance Utilization and Anonymity
for Instagram Users. In Proceedings of the 42nd International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR
’19), July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 4 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331364

1

anonymous comment on

INTRODUCTION

×

anonymous comment on facebook

Motivation. With the advent of Web 2.0, one-way communication on internet transformed into two-way communication where
users can openly discuss their ideas about news, products, pictures,
videos, etc. In most websites where a comment section is available
for the users, a user comment is displayed along with the user’s
real identity which may threaten her privacy. Recent studies indicate why users may prefer to share their ideas anonymously under

anonymous comment on youtube
anonymous comment on instagram

Figure 1: Queries regarding anonymous commenting
User privacy may even be at greater risk due to trading and
sharing data by the service providers [2]. Our proposed approach
addresses such problems
by keeping the identity of anonymous
Unknown - Use precise location
commenters secret even for the service providers.
The research question in this paper is as follows: How is it possible
1 of 2
5/20/18, 8:27 PM
to receive user comments without their usernames to protect their
privacy; considering this anonymity should not adversely interfere
with the service providers’ analytics

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France
© 2019 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6172-9/19/07. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331364

1 https://zendesk.com/
2 http://tiny.cc/zendesk_insta
3 http://tiny.cc/brand24

1225

Short Research Papers 3B: Recommendation and Evaluation

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

2

CONCEPTS AND NOTATIONS

In anonymous commenting, we deal with three entities:
• The set of items {p1 , ..., pn } which users comment on. Items
can be products of a website, Instagram posts, Youtube, etc.
• A set of users {u 1 , ..., uk } who comment on items
• A set of comments {c i j , ..., c np } where c i j denotes comment
by user i on item j
This paper aims to anonymize comment c i j by user ui in a way
that user privacy is preserved and analytics data required by the
item owners is accessible.

Figure 2: Anonymity in Google Play Store and Disqus
State of the art and its limitations. Currently, anonymous
commenting is possible via certain methods. For example, as illustrated on left in Fig. 2, users can comment on a Google Play Store
product anonymously, going by the name of A Google User. This
provides an environment where users can openly share their opinion about a product without worrying about their privacy; however,
some analytics may be lost.
Disqus4 is a commenting platform which allows users to comment with or without their real username (Fig. 2, right). If the user
wishes to share her real identity, she can integrate her Disqus account with her Facebook, Gmail or Twitter account and comment
using her real username. This is useful when the user doesn’t mind
the privacy matters and is willing to expose her identity. Anonymous commenting is also possible by Disqus in the following ways:

2.1

Measuring user privacy threat

Suppose user ui wants to comment on item j with c i j . If this comment is published anonymously, user’s privacy is less jeopardized.
Previous research [8] show that users follow similar lexical rules
and styles when writing texts such as comments. For example, particular words, misspellings and punctuation are powerful signals
that can be used to identify the user with high accuracy. User identification is, in fact, a classification problem where the classifier,
given a profile as an input, assigns a label to it. The label defines a
user identified as the profile owner.
In our problem, the given profile to the classifier can be a comment or a set of comments which we know are published by user
ui . Evidently, the more accurate the classifier is, the higher the
chances of exploiting user privacy gets. We use three criteria for
privacy assessment: F-measure, recall and precision. SVM classifier
with linear kernel is used as a state-of-art method for stylometry
identification. We used features proposed in [6] for training the
classifier since its dataset is gathered from Facebook which is closer
to our work in terms of domain and comment length.

• Commenting without any ties to a particular account using
a pseudonym. This approach is similar to A Google User and
privacy is protected but makes analytics difficult.
• Commenting with a single pseudonym linked to a particular
account (i.e. Facebook account), that is to say, a one-to-one
mapping of a real user to a pseudonym. Even though this approach makes the mentioned analytics possible, experiments
reveal that privacy may be greatly threatened by stylometry
and author attribution.

2.2

Measuring utility loss

As mentioned in section 1, by providing anonymous commenting
the service providers (SP) may lose some required data for analytics. In this paper, two important analytics conducted by service
providers are taken into account, and we aim to assess how much
of the required data is lost due to anonymity. Further research can
be conducted concerning analytics on location, gender and age of
the commenters or temporality of the comments. Two utility loss
functions are defined in this paper as detailed below.
Single item. In online services, an important measure (SI ) for SPs
and third parties who analyze SP data, is what percentage of the
audience comment positive (negative) sentiments on a given item.
Evidently, comment anonymization must not alter this measure as
much as possible. Eq 1 assesses loss quantity in single item mode.
SI + (SI − ) is the fraction of users commented positively (negatively)
on an item, and SI + ′ (SI − ′ ) is the same fraction after anonymization.

Many studies have been done on user privacy in the past years.
For instance, Beigia et al. [1] propose a framework for anti-profiling
where anonymous searching in search engines is made possible;
consequently, analytics for enhancing the service provider ranking
is feasible while protecting user privacy. In [2] the authors propose
a method for removing profiles disabled by the account owners
where statistical analytics by the service provider is not jeopardized,
and user privacy of deactivated accounts is also preserved.
Approach and contributions. This paper investigates the problem of anonymous commenting alongside data analytics. Proposed
methods must consider two aspects. Firstly, preserving user privacy, and secondly, retaining data analytics. We study the utility
loss (how much analytics is deprived) when protecting user privacy
by anonymizing its real username.
Remarkable achievements of the present paper are as follows:
• Utilizing mediator accounts for anonymous commenting
• Proposing a numerical measure for assessing privacy threat
and data analytic efficiency
• Conducting practical experiments on real data gathered from
Instagram

ÍN
U L1 =

i=1 (

S I i+ −S I i+ ′ 2
)
S I i+

+

ÍN

i=1 (

S I i− −S I i− ′ 2
S I i− )

2N

(1)

where SI + and SI − are calculated using Eq 2 (in this paper, neutral
comments are excluded).
SIi+ =

4 https://disqus.com/

1226

N eдi
Posi
, SIi− =
Ti
Ti

(2)

Short Research Papers 3B: Recommendation and Evaluation

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

Table 1: Dataset Details
(a) General statistics

Item
Users
Posts
Comments

Count
581
435
86,972

Algorithm 1: Random Anonymous Account Generation
Input: U = {u 1 , ..., uk }, C = {c i j , ..., c np }
Output: Anonymous accounts
1 Ru = ∅ ▷ where Ru is the Resolved_Users
2 R c = ∅ ▷ where R c is the Resolved_Comments
3 Select a random user u i from U − Ru
4 repeat
5
Cui′ = ∅

(b) Comment statistics

Item
Avg # of comment/user
Avg Length
Avg # of Words

Count
140.6
57.9
11.5

where Posi (N eдi ) denotes the number of users who have submitted
positive (negative) comments on post i, and Ti is the total number
of commenter for post i.
Pair item. SP needs to know what percentage of users have similar
comments (positive/negative) on items i and j simultaneously (PI ).
This improves accuracy in recommendation strategies for users
who have a lot in common. Eq 3 represents PIi j .

where u ′ is the anonymous user equivalent of ui
▷ and C ′ iis the set of comments assigned to u ′
ui

6
7
8
9

Posi j
N eдi j
, PIi−j =
(3)
Ti j
Ti j
where Posi j (N eдi j ) is the number of users who have submitted positive (negative) comments on posts i and j, and Ti j is total number of
commenters on both items. When anonymizing the comments, the
ideal is that the amount of loss before and after the anonymization
would be minimum; thus, utility loss is defined as below:
PIi+j =

10
11
12
13
14
15

Í N P Ii+j −P Ii+j 2 Í N P Ii−j −P Ii−j ′ 2
) + i =1 ( P I −
) )
i, j,i < j ( i =1 (
PI+
′

Í ÍN

U L2 =

ij

2×( N2 )

ij

16
17

(4)

i

Ru = Ru ∪ u i
foreach comment c i j ∈ Ci
▷ where Ci set of comments of user ui
do
C ′ = {c e j |c e j ∈ C − Rc , sentiment(c i j ) ==
sentiment(c e j )}
where C ′ is the set of comments on item j
▷ with the same sentiment of c
ij
if C ′ , ∅ then
Select a random comment c e j from C ′
Rc = Rc ∪ c e j , Cui′ = Cui′ ∪ c e j
else
Rc = Rc ∪ c i j , Cui′ = Cui′ ∪ c i j
end
end
until U − Ru = ∅

anonymous users similar to the real user, we aim to minimize
utility loss and preserve user privacy by combining comments from
real users and assigning them to an anonymous account. For this
approach, the following two methods are implemented in this paper:
• Random. We want to assign comments written by users
u 1 , ..., ui to anonymous users. In this method, we select a
random user in each iteration and try to build an anonymous
user whose comments have the same sense as those belonging to user ui , but these comments belong to different users.
If we fail to substitute user ui ’s comment with another one,
we assign her own comment to ui′ (algorithm 1 )
• Greedy. This method resembles the random approach to a
great extent, but it has a higher privacy preservation. The
difference is that the order of user selection for anonymization is based on the count of comments, and the priority is
given to users having more comments. If two users have the
same count of comments, one is selected with longer comment length average. The idea behind this approach is that
a user with numerous and lengthy comments is more likely
to be identified with stylometry methods; therefore, we first
anonymize her comments to alleviate the identification risk.

3 ASSIGNMENT TO ANONYMOUS ACCOUNT
In this section, proposed anonymization approaches are introduced.
The ideal approach must preserve user privacy while having the
lowest utility loss possible. Approaches are listed as follows:
A Google User (AGU). All anonymous comments are assigned to
one account (i.e. A Google User, described in section 1).
One-to-One (OTO). In this method, for each user ui an anonymous account aliased as ui′ is produced, and the commenter uses
the alias ui′ for anonymous commenting on an item.
Machine Translation (MT). For each user ui an anonymous account aliased as ui′ is produced, similar to one-to-one. For higher
privacy protection in this method, a round-trip machine translation
method (English → French → German →English) [7] is used for
anonymizing the comments of users. MT helps to preserve user privacy better than simple one-to-one where methods like stylometry
can identify the commenters with high accuracy.
Obfuscation. An anonymous account is built for each user similar to one-to-one, but before publishing the comments, they are
anonymized using [5]. To give a basic idea of how obfuscation
works, we make a few examples:
• Replacing stop words with alternatives or with a phrase
having the same meaning like each → all, some → a few
• Change words from British to American English and vice
versa like color ↔ colour, apologise ↔ aplogize etc.

4 EXPERIMENTS AND INSIGHTS
4.1 Dataset
The dataset was created by gathering comments on 435 posts published by Instagram user "arianagrande". English comments with
at least 10 characters were selected (via Google Translate API) in
data preprocessing. Comments were later filtered by users having
at least 90 comments on all the posts in the dataset. Finally, 86,972
comments were gathered. Dataset details are presented in Table 1.
Comment sense was identified using the method introduced in [3].

Anonymous account generation. Suppose users u 1 , ..., ui have
commented on items p1 , ..., pk . This approach aims to build an
anonymous account per real user where the distribution of positive
and negative comments on items is similar to its distribution by
real users to the extent possible, yet the assigned comments to an
anonymous user are written by separate real users. By creating

1227

Short Research Papers 3B: Recommendation and Evaluation

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

Table 2: Comparison of Anonymization Approaches
Algorithms
AGU
OTO
MT
Obfuscate
Random
Greedy

4.2

Loss1
0.064
0.014
0.049
0.052
0.014
0.014

Loss2
0.900
0.212
0.504
0.763
0.212
0.212

Precision
17%
60.9%
49.3%
28.6%
0.6%
0.1%

Recall
5.5%
66.9%
50.2%
33.2%
1%
0.3%

One-to-One

Greedy
Random

F-Measure
8.4%
63.8%
49.7%
29.7%
0.7%
0.1%

Low
Loss

Machine Translation
Obfuscate

A Google User

High
Loss

Setup

The flow of experiments conducted in the next section for calculating utility loss and privacy threat is as follows5 :
(1) For each user, half of her comments are anonymized using
one of the methods introduced in section 2. There are k real
users and m anonymous users in this phase. Each user has
some assigned comments detailed as below:
• Set of real users denoted by K = {u 1 , ..., uk }.
• Set of anonymous users denoted by A = {u 1 ′, ..., um ′ }.
• Set of real comments KCi = {c i j , ..., c ip } by user ui where
c i j denotes comment by real user ui on item j.
• Set of anonymous comments ACi = {c i j ′, ..., c ip ′ } by
anonymous user ui ′ where c i j ′ denotes comment by anonymous user ui ′ on item j.
(2) For each set KC and AC, stylometry vectors with features
listed in [6] are extracted.
(3) Using SVM classifier, we build a model which estimates the
real writer given its AC stylometry vector.
Results and insights. In this section, we compare the performance
of proposed methods on our dataset regarding measures related to
utility-loss and privacy threat. As mentioned before, utility-loss is
calculated based on loss1 (Eq. 1) and loss2 (Eq. 4). Precision, recall
and F-measure were used as measures for privacy threat assessment of the algorithms. Evidently, the lower loss1 and loss2 are, the
lesser analytics data is lost, and the lower the accuracy of SVM, the
higher the user privacy is protected. Table 2 compares our proposed
methods based on assessment measures (reports are averaged over
100 runs). We added results of commenting with real username for
the sake of comparison in the last row; clearly, utility-loss is ideal
while user privacy is threatened to the greatest extent.
A Google User (AGU). This method has the highest loss compared
to other methods since all the users’ comments are anonymized
with the same pseudonym; therefore, SP loses the majority of its
analytics. On the upper hand, it preserves user privacy greatly since
identification of the real user is practically impossible.
One-to-One (OTO). Compared to A Google User, this method has
a converse approach. Loss1 and loss2 have greatly decreased (best
method for loss alleviation), but the problem is that user privacy
is threatened to a great extent, that is to say, identification of the
commenter is possible with a 63.8% F-measure. MT-based and obfuscated one-to-one also try to make a trade-off between loss and
privacy. Both of these methods improve privacy preservation, but
increase loss1 and loss2 compared to one-to-one.
Anonymous account generation. anonymous account generation methods make a more efficient combination of privacy threat
and utility-loss compared to stylometry-based methods such as
obfuscate and MT which merely improve privacy. Specifically, the

Low Privacy

High Privacy

Figure 3: Comparison of Anonymization Approaches
greedy method minimized loss1 and loss2 while SVM accuracy
for user identification is very low. This methods also outperforms
A Google User in privacy measure. Comments of different users
are displayed under one single account, and extracted features
for anonymous comments don’t belong to any specific user. This
explains why SVM accuracy is lower compared to A Google User
approach. Greedy method produces the same utility-loss as random approach but lowers privacy threat. The reason is that greedy
prioritizes the users having a higher chance of identification with
stylometry in the anonymization process. Fig. 3 shows comparison
of all the algorithms based on privacy and utility-loss measures.

5

CONCLUSION

We introduced the anonymous commenting problem and proposed
an alternative approach as opposed to traditional methods such as
A Google User. In our proposed methods, anonymous comments
belonging to real users are assigned to anonymous accounts so that
apart from high user privacy preservation, service provider requirements for data analytics are not adversely affected. Our experiments
on an Instagram dataset using various algorithms demonstrate that
high user privacy protection while retaining precise data analytics
is possible. An issue to resolve for future studies is implementing the algorithms in an online environment with parallelization
capabilities in order to conduct the algorithms in large scale.

REFERENCES
[1] A. Biega, R. Saha Roy, and G. Weikum. 2017. Privacy through Solidarity: A UserUtility-Preserving Framework to Counter Profiling. In Proc. of SIGIR ’17.
[2] S. Eslami, A. Biega, R. Roy, and G. Weikum. 2017. Privacy of Hidden Profiles:
Utility-Preserving Profile Removal in Online Forums. In Proc. CIKM ’17.
[3] CJ. Hutto and E. Gilbert. 2014. Vader: A parsimonious rule-based model for
sentiment analysis of social media text. In Proc. of ICWSM ’14.
[4] R. Kang, S. Brown, and S. Kiesler. 2013. Why do people seek anonymity on the
internet?: informing policy and design. In Proc. of SIGCHI ’13.
[5] G. Karadzhov, T. Mihaylova, Y. Kiprov, G. Georgiev, I. Koychev, and P. Nakov. 2017.
The Case for Being Average: A Mediocrity Approach to Style Masking and Author
Obfuscation. In Proc. of CLEF ’17.
[6] JS. Li, LC. Chen, JV. Monaco, and P. Singh. 2016. A comparison of classifiers and
features for authorship authentication of social networking messages. CC-PE
(2016).
[7] JR. Rao and P. Rohatgi. 2000. Can Pseudonymity Really Guarantee Privacy?. In
Proc. of SSYM ’00.
[8] A. Rocha, WJ. Scheirer, CW. Forstall, T. Cavalcante, A. Theophilo, B. Shen, ARB.
Carvalho, and E. Stamatatos. 2017. Authorship attribution for social media forensics. IEEE TIFS (2017).
[9] K. Zhang and RF. Kizilcec. 2014. Anonymity in Social Media: Effects of Content Controversiality and Social Endorsement on Sharing Behavior. In Proc. of
ICWSM ’14.

5 http://tiny.cc/anonymous_commenting

1228

