Short Research Papers 1B: Recommendation and Evaluation

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

Investigating the Interplay Between Searchers’ Privacy
Concerns and Their Search Behavior
Steven Zimmerman, Alistair Thorpe, Chris Fox, Udo Kruschwitz
University of Essex
Colchester, United Kingdom
{szimme,athorpb,foxcj,udo}@essex.ac.uk

ABSTRACT

1

Privacy concerns are becoming a dominant focus in search applications, thus there is a growing need to understand implications
of efforts to address these concerns. Our research investigates a
search system with privacy warning labels, an approach inspired by
decision making research on food nutrition labels. This approach is
designed to alert users to potential privacy threats in their search
for information as one possible avenue to address privacy concerns.
Our primary goal is to understand the extent to which attitudes
towards privacy are linked to behaviors that protect privacy.
In the present study, participants were given a set of fact-based
decision tasks from the domain of health search. Participants were
rotated through variations of search engine results pages (SERPs)
including a SERP with a privacy warning light system. Lastly, participants completed a survey to capture attitudes towards privacy,
behaviors to protect privacy, and other demographic information.
In addition to the comparison of interactive search behaviors of a
privacy warning SERP with a control SERP, we compared self-report
privacy measures with interactive search behaviors. Participants
reported strong concerns around privacy of health information
while simultaneously placing high importance on the correctness
of this information. Analysis of our interactive experiment and selfreport privacy measures indicate that 1) choice of privacy-protective
browsers has a significant link to privacy attitudes and privacyprotective behaviors in a SERP and 2) there are no significant links
between reported concerns towards privacy and recorded behavior
in an information retrieval system with warnings that enable users
to protect their privacy.

There are many examples where personal data is collected via
modern technology, of which 3rd-party tracking is just one. For
information retrieval (IR) platforms, such as Google, this data combined with user queries, has potentially high value with respect to
personalization [15] and advertising [17]. This data can be traced to
an individual via linkage of "pseudo-anonymous" data, such as the
IP address of the home router being used. While this data may be
useful for demographic segmentation, including personal health, it
raises many privacy concerns [1, 7, 16, 19, 20]. While seemingly innocuous, collection of our personal data (via 3rd-party tracking and
other means) comes with potential threats and harms [3, 4, 12, 21].
Several search engines (e.g. Duck Duck Go) now promise not
to collect personal data and web browsing tools (e.g. Tor) are also
available to prevent identification. Evidence suggests only a minority of people1 make use of 3rd-party blocking software, even
though this technology demonstrates promising results [3, 21].
Combining these matters and knowledge of the current IR landscape, no search platform is currently available that allows the user
to easily assess the level of personal privacy exchanged for a click
on a result. It is our goal to begin exploration into such a system
that provides privacy risk assessment. Understanding impacts on a
user’s information need is one avenue to explore with regards to
system changes to address privacy concerns [22].
We identify two additional problems. First, to our knowledge, no
SERP designed with a privacy warning system has demonstrated
a reduction in privacy impacts in search. Second, a multitude of
survey questions2 attempt to capture privacy preferences, however
these are often misleading and rarely linked to actual behaviors [8];
also, they are frequently proprietary and thus costly to use. Taking
[10] as one example, strong reliability is noted with self-report measures, but no validity is provided through linkage to actual behavior.
We also note limited attempts to capture self-report behaviors for
enhancing privacy protection (e.g. usage of anonymous networks
and browsers that prevent fingerprinting), which we identify as
promising areas to explore.
To address problem 1, we designed a SERP with privacy warnings inspired by nutrition labels; nutrition labels are a proposed
approach [6] to address misinformation in IR. To address problem
2, we use the survey in [10] as a starting point, however we followed suggestions in [5] and by authors of [9] to develop a set of
questions with the goal of identifying individuals that do behave as
they report. One main contribution of our work is a set of questions
that may be used by future researchers to identify individuals that
express concern about privacy and are more likely to take action

KEYWORDS
Privacy; Information Retrieval; Interactive Studies
ACM Reference Format:
Steven Zimmerman, Alistair Thorpe, Chris Fox, Udo Kruschwitz. 2019. Investigating the Interplay Between Searchers’ Privacy Concerns and Their
Search Behavior. In Proceedings of the 42nd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’19),
July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 4 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331280
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6172-9/19/07. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331280

1 In

INTRODUCTION

our study, only 11% subjects reported usage.
examples in [10, 17] and Table 3.1 in [8]

2 see

953

Short Research Papers 1B: Recommendation and Evaluation

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

had to determine if the treatment was helpful, not helpful or inconclusive based on the information they had available. Participants
were not made aware (until post-experiment debriefing) that there
were an equal number of helpful and not helpful tasks and that no
inconclusive reviews were included.

to protect their privacy, counter to the "privacy paradox" [13]. The
other contribution being evidence that a stoplight SERP approach
designed to reduce privacy impacts does in fact reduce privacy
impacts for this subset of privacy-concerned individuals.

2

QUESTIONS AND HYPOTHESES

3.1.2 SERP. Participants encountered 5 different interfaces, 4 SERP
variants and one control question (as was done with [14] and [22]).
Using the same Graeco-Latin design method as [14], 2 search tasks
(1 helpful and 1 not helpful) were assigned to each interface. A
baseline SERP, similar to modern search engines was used, where
results were ranked based on the cumulative distribution function
(CDF) used in [22]. The second SERP variation, the nutrition-labelbased stoplight approach, displayed results with the same ranking
method, however there was a stoplight to the left of results based
upon the number of privacy trackers. The coloration of stoplights
was based upon the median and upper quartile of privacy trackers for documents assigned to the search task (see Figure 1). Two
other SERP variants, not in the scope of research questions covered herein, were also encountered by participants.5 As did [14]
and [22], definitions of the medical question and the 3 possible
decisions (helpful, not helpful or inconclusive) were provided to
participants throughout the search task. Users could click through
multiple pages, with 10 results per result page and 19-22 documents
available per search task, at most users had 3 pages available. A
button was provided to take users to a page where they made a
decision on the appropriate answer to the medical question.

The central questions to our experiment are 1) "Does a search system
that alerts users to potential privacy threats for results, significantly
reduce privacy impacts when compared with a baseline search system?", 2) "To what extent are self-reported attitudes towards privacy
linked to behaviors to protect privacy?", 3) "For a set of self-reported
privacy-protective beliefs and behaviors, what self-report measures
are both reliable and valid?". Based on user interactions in a search
interface linked to the privacy proxy of 3rd-party trackers and their
responses in a post-experiment survey, we address each of these
questions.
Guided by previous work demonstrating that stop light approaches produce healthier eating behaviors [11, 18], we expect the
baseline to have significantly higher encounters with privacy trackers. For any self-report measures (attitudes and behaviors regarding privacy) found to be reliable, we expect that attitudes more
strongly supporting privacy protection will be significantly linked
to self-reported behaviors that protect privacy. For any reliable selfreported attitudes and behaviors more strongly supporting privacy,
we expect a significant link to privacy-protective behaviors in the
SERP offering privacy-protective warning lights, with significance
being an indicator of the survey’s predictive validity.

3

3.1.3 Questionnaire. The survey (implemented with Qualtrics) was
provided to participants after the main experiment, which was done
to minimize the possibility of priming. Demographic information
was collected first (including age, gender and educational information). The survey questions that followed were grouped in blocks as
outlined in Section 3.2.1. Within each of these blocks, the questions
were randomized, however we did not randomize the ordering of
the blocks. Privacy attitudes were captured first, followed by reported behaviors (e.g. what browser type and frequency they used),
after which we collected topical privacy attitudes (e.g. health and
finance) and lastly preferences about the SERP. At the very end
of the questionnaire users were provided with exit information to
ensure the correct information about search tasks was provided.
Section 3.3 covers methods for scoring.

METHODS

We used the same methods and design as in [22], which were an
adoption of methods by Pogacar et al. [14]. The updated corpus
developed by [22] was also used in our study, as well as use of the
result ranking method. The questionnaire developed for our study
is introduced in the measures section below.

3.1

Experimental Design

A within-group design was used to conduct the experiment, in
which users encountered SERP variants and multiple search tasks.
SERP results were retrieved from the corpus, which included links
to 3rd-party trackers. The Ghostery 3rd-party tracking tool3 was
used to determine the number of trackers for each result in the
corpus. 3rd-party trackers are a relevant proxy as they often collect
pseudo anonymous information such as IP addresses, which can be
easily linked to who and/or where you are. The 3rd-party trackers
for each website are treated independently from each other.4

3.1.4 Participants. After receiving ethics approval from the university review board, we recruited 91 participants via volunteer lists
maintained by the psychology department (of which 4000+ people
are possible). Each participant received £10 or a course credit for
their time. The experiment and survey combined took 50 minutes on
average. Each rotation of the experiment required 10 participants,
thus 9 rotations were completed with one additional participant
included in our analysis. Baseline results were not recorded for 6
users, and these were removed for paired t-tests. Of our sample(N
= 91), 89 were students, of which 77 of those were undergraduates.
The average age of participants was 23.2 years and 63 identified as

3.1.1 Search Tasks. 10 fact based health search tasks dependent
upon findings from Cochrane Medical reviews were used. The medical reviews determined if research evidence indicated a particular
medical treatment was helpful or not helpful for a given medical condition, with the possibility that evidence was inconclusive.
Thus, as was performed in [14] and [22], participants in this study

5 One

variant re-ranked results based on total trackers (result 1 would have least
number of trackers and last result for task would have highest number of trackers).
The other variant filtered out any results with the number of trackers above the median.
In all SERPs, users had the option to shut off the privacy-protective method, but no
participant went into the settings to make such a change.

3 https://www.ghostery.com/

(Accessed August 2018)
4 For example, Google DoubleClick is a tracker on many different websites, and is not
independent if you visit two different websites using this tracker. In the experiment,
each tracking encounter is treated as separate from encounters on different websites.

954

Short Research Papers 1B: Recommendation and Evaluation

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

you? ". The health attitudes group had 3 questions, such as "HQ1
- How concerned are you about the sensitivity of the following
personal information that you share? "6 ; not included here is a list
of 10 other non-health topics adapted from the appendix in [10].
As final measures, for each attitude group we used the normalized
mean of responses (i.e. sum responses divided by total possible
points).
For the behaviors7 , we also use the normalized mean of responses.
For general behaviors we asked: "EQ1 - Which of the following do
you do?" 8 , with 1 point each. Browser enhancing behavior was
captured by "EQ2 - How frequently do you use the following web
browsers? [Tor; Mozilla Firefox; Brave]". Search-enhancing
behavior: "EQ3 - How frequently do you use the following search
engines? [Duck Duck Go; Qwant]".
We tested the reliability of the two attitude groups and found
they demonstrated excellent internal consistency, with Cronbach’s
α = .76 for the 7 general attitudes questions and Cronbach’s α =
.89 for the health questions. We considered combining the 3 privacy behavior groups as one measure, but given the unsatisfactory
reliability of the scale (Cronbach’s α = .53), we kept the 3 measures (General behaviours, usage of browsers, and usage of search
engines) separate.

Figure 1: SERP with privacy stoplights shown. An explanation of lights was available to users. Color of stoplight was
based on the number of 3rd-party trackers for the associated
website in results, where red was given to the top quartile,
yellow assigned to results with total trackers between median and top quartile and green given to everything else. A
tooltip was provided to explain the different colors, however
participants were not given any other information (until debriefing) that we were investigating their search behaviors
with respect to privacy. The baseline SERP had no stoplights,
but otherwise had all the same elements. In the top center of
the SERP the task description and medical definitions were
available. Definitions of the decisions were in the top right.
Pagination was available with 10 results per page.

3.3

We used linear regression to test our hypotheses with respect to the
self-report constructs on the dependent SERP experiment privacy
metrics variables (in Section 3.2), for which we moderated the
analysis by the type of interface (baseline or stoplight) associated
with the search task. Additionally, we performed linear regression
to model possible effects of self-report attitudes onto self-report
behaviors. Two-sided independent and paired t-tests were used to
compare differences for the interactive design, with significance
values set to p < .05.

Female. English was reported as the native language for 27 students.
STEM departments provided 53 participants, with 17 participants
having a background in computer science. 42 participants reported
using a privacy-protective browser at least once a month, while
only 10 reported usage of a privacy-enhancing search engine.

3.2

Analysis

Measures

4

For the interactive experiment, the SERP interface type (baseline vs.
stoplight) is used as the independent variable. For the dependent
variable (privacy tracking), we take the average trackers encountered for each search task and normalize by the maximum number
of trackers that could be encountered for the search task. If a user
did not click on a link for the task, then 0 trackers were recorded.
We also use the self-report behaviors as the dependent variable for
analysis of self-reported privacy attitudes.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

With respect to our first question, similar to findings with a smaller
sample (n = 40) in [22], we find no evidence in our entire sample
suggesting that a privacy stoplight approach will reduce privacy
impacts for the population as a whole when compared with the
baseline.
Our findings in Table 1 are helpful for answering our remaining
two questions around reported attitudes and behaviors. The privacy
attitude construct, while reliable appears to have limited predictive
validity, we find no evidence suggesting it is a useful measure to
predict how individuals will behave when presented with a stoplight
privacy warning system in a SERP. We are not entirely surprised by
this finding based on existing literature. Conversely, self-reported
privacy behaviors are more promising at predicting how users

3.2.1 Survey. We generated a survey to capture general attitudes
towards privacy, attitudes towards health privacy and behaviors
considered to be privacy-enhancing (we consider general behaviors,
and usage of browser and search engine). The two attitude groups
were on 7-point Likert scales, the general behavior group was a
set of yes/no options while the search and browser behaviors were
reported frequencies (daily, weekly, monthly or never). Though
utility measures (such as [2]) were an avenue considered, due to
concerns around participant fatigue we excluded such measures
from our study.
The general attitude group consisted of 7 questions in total,
and included questions such as "How likely do you think it is that
personal information submitted / shared on the internet will be:
AQ1 - Shared or sold to others? AQ2 - Used by others to harm

6 For

brevity, questions AQ3-7 and HQ2-3 are not included. These questions
can be found in a copy of the full survey given at end of experiment at
https://github.com/stevenzim/sigir-2019
7 Note, surveys capturing enhancing behavior are limited, therefore our survey items
are based on suggestions from https://www.privacytools.io (Accessed August 2018)
8 "Please select all that apply: Use = [Anonymous communications
networks, end-to-end encryption, software to block 3rd-party trackers,
a VPN, software to prevent browser fingerprinting, software to
delete cookies automatically, software to ensure HTTPS communication],
Disable = [javascript, cookies]"

955

Short Research Papers 1B: Recommendation and Evaluation

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

will behave in our privacy-enhancing SERP, where we find small
effects when considering reported usage of browsers that enhance
privacy. In our analysis, we noted a distinct split between subjects
(those who reported usage of privacy-enhancing browsers, and
those who do not). Using this split, we performed a Welch’s twosided independent t-test comparing % of max trackers encountered
in the stoplight SERP for participants that use privacy-enhancing
browsers (n = 42, M = 0.22, SD = 0.19) with those that do not (n =
49, M = 0.28, SD = 0.24) and find these differences to be significant
t (179.79) = 2.11, p = .036, d = .31. The same split is used for
within-group analysis to compare interactions against the baseline
SERP. For the group not using privacy-enhancing browsers, no
differences were found for comparison of the stoplight SERP (M =
0.30, SD = 0.15) with the baseline SERP (M = .31, SD = 0.22),
t (47) = −0.46, p = .646, d = −0.07. For the group reporting usage
of privacy-enhancing browsers there is a trend towards reduction in
privacy encounters with the stoplight SERP (M = 0.23, SD = 0.17)
compared to the baseline SERP (M = 0.31, SD = 0.18), t (36) = 1.91,
p = .064, d = 0.31.

Based on these findings, we conclude that the self-reported
browser type is a useful pre-screening metric to identify participants more likely to be concerned about privacy, which is a key
contribution of our work. We also believe that our stoplight approach is a promising direction to head for individuals that want to
reduce personal privacy impacts. To increase confidence in the findings presented here, future research should consider refinement of
our privacy constructs as well as the potential for online data collection to overcome the limitations of within-subjects design/resource
constraints.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Economic and Social Research
Council grant number ES/M010236/1 and The Human Rights Big
Data and Technology (HRBDT) Project.

REFERENCES
[1] B. Bi, M. Shokouhi, M. Kosinski, and T. Graepel. 2013. Inferring the demographics
of search users: Social data meets search queries. In Proc. WWW. 131–140.
[2] J.P. Carrascal, C. Riederer, V. Erramilli, M. Cherubini, and R. de Oliveira. 2013.
Your Browsing Behavior for a Big Mac: Economics of Personal Information Online.
In Proc. WWW. 189–200.
[3] S. Englehardt and A. Narayanan. 2016. Online tracking: A 1-million-site measurement and analysis. In Proc. SIGSAC. 1388–1401.
[4] S. Englehardt, D. Reisman, C. Eubank, P. Zimmerman, J. Mayer, A. Narayanan,
and E.W. Felten. 2015. Cookies that give you away: The surveillance implications
of web tracking. In Proc. WWW. 289–299.
[5] F.J. Fowler Jr. 2013. Survey research methods. Sage publications.
[6] N. Fuhr, A. Giachanou, G. Grefenstette, I. Gurevych, A. Hanselowski, K. Jarvelin,
R. Jones, Y. Liu, J. Mothe, W. Nejdl, I. Peters, and B. Stein. 2017. An Information
Nutritional Label for Online Documents. In ACM SIGIR Forum, Vol. 51. 46–66.
[7] E. Horvitz and D. Mulligan. 2015. Data, privacy, and the greater good. Science
349, 6245 (2015), 253–255.
[8] G. Iachello and J. Hong. 2007. End-user privacy in human–computer interaction.
Foundations and Trends® in Human–Computer Interaction 1, 1 (2007), 1–137.
[9] S. P Jenkins, L. Cappellari, P. Lynn, A. Jäckle, and E. Sala. 2006. Patterns of
consent: evidence from a general household survey. Royal Statistical Society:
Series A (Statistics in Society) 169, 4 (2006), 701–722.
[10] P.G. Leon, B. Ur, Y. Wang, M. Sleeper, R. Balebako, R. Shay, L. Bauer, M. Christodorescu, and L.F. Cranor. 2013. What matters to users?: factors that affect users’
willingness to share information with online advertisers. In Proc. SOUPS.
[11] N. Maubach, J. Hoek, and D. Mather. 2014. Interpretive front-of-pack nutrition
labels. Comparing competing recommendations. Appetite 82 (2014), 67–77.
[12] J. R. Mayer and J. C. Mitchell. 2012. Third-party web tracking: Policy and technology. In 2012 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy. IEEE, 413–427.
[13] P.A. Norberg, D.R. Horne, and D.A. Horne. 2007. The privacy paradox: Personal
information disclosure intentions versus behaviors. Consumer Affairs 41, 1 (2007),
100–126.
[14] F. A. Pogacar, A. Ghenai, M. D. Smucker, and C. L. A. Clarke. 2017. The Positive
and Negative Influence of Search Results on People’s Decisions about the Efficacy
of Medical Treatments. In Proc. SIGIR. 209–216.
[15] J. Teevan, S. T. Dumais, and E. Horvitz. 2005. Personalizing search via automated
analysis of interests and activities. In Proc. SIGIR. 449–456.
[16] Z. Tufekci. 2015. Facebook said its algorithms do help form echo chambers, and
the tech press missed it. New Perspectives Quarterly 32, 3 (2015), 9–12.
[17] B. Ur, P. G. Leon, L. F. Cranor, R. Shay, and Y. Wang. 2012. Smart, Useful, Scary,
Creepy: Perceptions of Online Behavioral Advertising. In Proc. SOUPS. 4.
[18] E. van Herpen and H.C.M. van Trijp. 2011. Front-of-pack nutrition labels. Their
effect on attention and choices when consumers have varying goals and time
constraints. Appetite 57, 1 (2011), 148–160.
[19] I. Weber and C. Castillo. 2010. The demographics of web search. In Proc. SIGIR.
523–530.
[20] I. Weber, V.R.K. Garimella, and E. Borra. 2012. Mining Web query logs to analyze
political issues. In Proc. WebSci. 330–334.
[21] Z. Yu, S. Macbeth, K. Modi, and J.M. Pujol. 2016. Tracking the trackers. In Proc.
WWW. 121–132.
[22] S. Zimmerman, A. Thorpe, C. Fox, and U. Kruschwitz. 2019. Privacy Nudging in
Search: Investigating Potential Impacts. In Proc. CHIIR. 283–287.

Table 1: Results of 4 predictive models with significant effects are included in the table. In bold are dependent variables of linear regression models, with the lines below separating each model. The first two results are for self-reported
attitudes (Attd) towards general and health privacy, each
on the reported Behavior (Bhv). Bhv for the browser is regressed on the % of maximum privacy tracker encounters
in the SERP for the search task. M1 denotes model on data
from stoplight SERP only (with no moderation). Model M2 is
moderated by the SERP type (baseline or stoplight), all other
models had one input variable. ∗∗ and ∗ suggest significant
results with p < .01 and p < .05 respectively. Not included in
table, we find p = 0.11 to 0.55 for models: Attd -> Bhv (general and search), Attd -> % of maximum trackers and Bhv
(general and search) -> % of maximum trackers.
Bhv-Browser

b

F

df

SE

p

Attd-General

0.30

10.96

89

0.09

∗∗ .001

Attd-Health

0.14

8.98

89

0.05

∗∗ .004

Bhv-BrowserM 1

−0.29

5.57

180

0.03

∗ .020

Bhv-BrowserM 2
Bhv-Browser
SERP
Bhv-Browser × SERP

−0.23
0.03
0.12

−2.64
1.34
0.70

360
360
360

0.09
0.02
0.17

∗∗ .009

% of max trackers

.182
.490

The remaining two self-report behaviors show some promise,
however we note that a limited number of participants (< 10 reported use of privacy-protective "search" engines and < 20 for usage
of "general" internet privacy protection methods) reported behaviors contributing to these constructs, additional studies are needed
to better formulate and to confirm validity of these constructs.
Results for both "general" and "search" are discussed in Table 1
caption.

956

