Workshop

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

Third International Workshop on Recent Trends in News
Information Retrieval (NewsIR’19)
Dyaa Albakour
Miguel Martinez
Sylvia Tippmann

Ahmet Aker

University of Duisburg-Essen
aker@is.inf.uni-due.de

Jonathan Stray

Columbia Journalism School
jonathan.stray@columbia.edu

Signal AI
research@signal-ai.com

Shiri Dori-Hacohen

Alberto Barrón-Cedeño

AuCoDe
shiri@controversies.info

DIT Università di Bologna
a.barron@unibo.it

that new developments in journalism create for IR researchers, and
the complexity of information access tasks for news readers.

ABSTRACT
The journalism industry has undergone a revolution in the past
decade, leading to new opportunities as well as challenges. News
consumption, production and delivery have all been affected and
transformed by technology. Readers require new mechanisms to
cope with the vast volume of information in order to be informed
about news events. Reporters have begun to use natural language
processing (NLP) and (IR) techniques for investigative work. Publishers and aggregators are seeking new business models, and new
ways to reach and retain their audience. A shift in business models
has led to a gradual shift in styles of journalism in attempts to
increase page views; and, far more concerning, to real mis- and
dis-information, alongside allegations of “fake news” threatening
the journalistic freedom and integrity of legitimate news outlets.
Social media platforms drive viewership, creating filter bubbles and
an increasingly polarized readership.
News documents have always been a part of research on information access and retrieval methods. Over the last few years, the
IR community has increasingly recognized these challenges in journalism and opened a conversation about how we might begin to
address them. Evidence of this recognition is the participation in the
two previous editions of our NewsIR workshop, held in ECIR 2016
and 2018. One of the most important outcomes of those workshops
is an increasing awareness in the community about the changing
nature of journalism and the IR challenges it entails. To move yet
another step forward, the goal of the third edition of our workshop
is to create a multidisciplinary venue that brings together news
experts from both technology and journalism. This would take
NewsIR from a European forum targeting mainly IR researchers,
into a more inclusive and influential international forum. We hope
that this new format will foster further understanding for both
news professionals and IR researchers, as well as producing better
outcomes for news consumers. We will address the possibilities and
challenges that technology offers to the journalists, the challenges

ACM Reference Format:
Dyaa Albakour, Miguel Martinez, Sylvia Tippmann, Ahmet Aker, Jonathan
Stray, Shiri Dori-Hacohen, and Alberto Barrón-Cedeño. 2019. Third International Workshop on Recent Trends in News Information Retrieval
(NewsIR’19). In Proceedings of the 42nd International ACM SIGIR Conference
on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’19), July 21–25,
2019, Paris, France. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 3 pages. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3331184.3331646

1

BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION

Text as a medium is a common ground for the domains of news and
information retrieval (IR). While journalists make use of text for
information gathering and create text as one medium of their output,
IR aims to extract relevant resources to satisfy an information need.
While traditional news gathering is largely manual, the field of
IR seeks automation to process large amounts of text – and this
automation is increasingly useful in journalism.
With the increasing popularity of personal computers, print publications went online, thereby removing the space limitation of the
traditional newspaper. The proliferation of mobile devices accelerated this trend and, in 2008, more Americans reported consuming
their news online rather than in print format [7]. Traditionally,
news have been exclusively the remit of professional journalists,
ensuring editorial standards, including fact checking and a coherence in writing style. The rise of online self-publication in the last
decade(s), however, is challenging this definition of journalism.
Blogging now allows anyone to write articles and publish them on
the internet, to contribute and even steer public discourse. As a
result there is more content, and more diverse content, which has
been a boon to journalism in some respects. Unfortunately, this
democratization of journalism has also led to more noise, along
with more misinformation and disinformation1 .
Therefore, when consumers go online to satisfy a news information need, they will find a vast amount of news-like information,
sometimes featuring alternative points of view and so-called ‘alternative facts’. Consequently, trust and the credibility of news sources

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6172-9/19/07.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331646

1 Misinformation

is accidentally inaccurate content, whereas disinformation is false
content written with a deliberate intent to mislead. The line between the two can be
blurry and often difficult to judge.

1429

Workshop

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

are increasingly important metrics, and one of the intersections of
IR and journalism.
The way we prioritize news has changed as well. Traditionally,
making a news article a ‘top story’ was an editorial decision, based
on perceived impact on the outlet target audience or wider society.
With online journalism as a new style of publication, the ‘front page’
is not necessarily the most impactful news of the day anymore.
Many news sources now rely on online advertising as a business
model. The most read and shared article becomes the biggest story.
Social media as a distribution channel has magnified this effect,
thereby challenging editorial judgment with popularity. Indeed, two
years ago, social media overtook print media as a source of news
among US adults [6]. This hunt for clicks can in turn affect news text,
writing style and click-bait headlines. Ranking and recommendation
systems, which respond to these clicks, play a crucial role in news
creation, consumption and propagation.
News recommendation techniques can help consumers identify
relevant, more personalized, content —to find the needle in the
haystack. However, it can also create a feedback loop that is echoed
and enhanced by the readers own social network and isolate us
into disjoint ‘news filter bubbles’. Bots amplifying certain articles
on social media can also shape the perception of which articles are
worthy of our time, and indeed recent studies have estimated that
9-15% of Twitter profiles are bots [9] and that 66% of links shared
on Twitter are shared by bots [3]. A more informed dialog between
IR specialists and professional journalists may help to tune the
techniques available for a more purposeful information gain and
exchange that empowers real humans in society, ideally one that
fosters nuanced understanding rather than exacerbating falsehoods
and division.
With the same goal in mind, investigative journalists have turned
towards NLP and IR techniques to support their reporting. The sheer
volume of contemporary data – whether from leaks or open government sources – requires computational techniques, and journalists
increasingly employ search, text summarization, automation in
fact-checking, entity recognition and topic classification to support
information gathering.
The aforementioned opportunities have attracted much research
recently in the IR community and many other related communities,
such as NLP and Machine Learning (ML). Indeed, IR experts have
long relied on news corpora to study and learn from, since it reflects
generalist information, e.g. [4]. News is multilingual, mostly free
of domain specific jargon, and covers a wide range of topics and
entities. News text has been used in IR and NLP to improve and
evaluate models for a variety of tasks, such as text classification [4],
entity recognition [8], and machine translation [2]. Now more than
ever, a large volume of news text resides in the public domain or is
otherwise abundantly available for research.
Moreover, previous NewsIR workshops run at ECIR 2016 and
2018 have demonstrated the continuing interest in news retrieval
challenges and the applications to journalism. Both workshops
were considered a great success according to various indicators:
the large number of submissions, the quality of the papers, the
diversity of topics, the large number of attendees and the high level
of interactions [1, 5]. Taking this forward, we propose to run yet
another NewsIR workshop. We detail the goals of our proposed
workshop in the next section.

2

WORKSHOP PURPOSE

Now in its third version, we aim to organize NewsIR in an even
more multidisciplinary format and taking the conversation from a
European forum to the global IR community.
Building on the success of its previous versions [1, 5], the main
goal of this workshop is to bring together news experts from both
the technology side (mainly experts in IR, NLP and ML), and the
journalism side. The objective is to stimulate discussion around
the current challenges in the journalism and news processing environment and to combine the expertise of these communities.
Technology experts and, in particular, the IR, NLP and ML communities, will present the latest breakthroughs in news processing and
related subjects of trust and misinformation, with an emphasis on
the application of their findings. The journalistic community will
complement this by offering a better understanding of the needs
and challenges they are facing, and suggestions for future research
directions. We aim to have a substantial representation from industry, from small start-ups to large enterprises, to strengthen the
relationships. This also represents a unique opportunity to understand the different problems and priorities of each community and
to recognize areas that are not currently receiving much academic
attention but are nonetheless of considerable commercial interest.

3

WORKSHOP FORMAT AND STRUCTURE

To help us achieve the goals set out in Section 2, we aim for an
interactive and dynamic full-day workshop that will be a mixture of
keynote, paper and demo presentations as well as discussion breakout sessions. We propose to start with an introductory session on
the overall workshop topics led by the workshop organizers. For
invited talks, we have approached a number of keynote speakers
who can provide insights into the topic from both a journalistic
industry and an information retrieval point of view. Finally, the
workshop also includes a panel discussion with members drawn
from academia, publishers, large companies and SMEs. For papers,
we will solicit submissions of technical papers (4 pages), demos
and position papers (2 pages) in ACM double-column style to cover
the challenges discussed in Section 1. In particular, the topics of
interest to the workshop may include (but is not limited to):
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

1430

Credibility, controversy and fact-checking
Bias and plurality in news
Summarization of opinions in news
Information silos and the effect of algorithms on news consumption
Event and anomaly detection
IR/NLP in Data Journalism
News-related user-generated content (e.g. using comments
to enhance news retrieval or to detect controversy)
Media monitoring and Reputation Management
News ranking and online learning-to-rank
News recommendation and personalization
The “filter bubble” and de-personalization
Entity recognition and entity linking in news
De-duplication and clustering of news articles
Author identification and disambiguation
Evaluation of news retrieval systems
Conversational journalism and chat bots

Workshop

•
•
•
•
•

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

Mobile-first journalism
IR in investigative reporting
Data visualization and story-telling
Traditional and social media integration
Multiple document and temporal summarization

workshop, we continue this trend where five new co-organisers
have joined us this time. We are excited to have a multi-disciplinary
and a truly diverse committee in all different aspects. In particular,
between us, we have expertise in multiple areas of research (IR,
NLP, machine learning and journalism). We also represent both
academia and industry, working in orgainsations spread around
different parts of the world.
For the programme committee, we have approached many researchers from both academia and industry. All of whom are either
experts in the topics of workshop or have been involved in news
information retrieval in the past. The PC includes the following
members:
• Marco Bonzanini, Bonzanini Consulting Ltd, UK
• Alejandro Bellogin Kouki, UAM, Spain
• Ricardo Campos, Polytechnic Institute of Tomar, Portugal
• Jon Chamberlain, University of Essex, UK
• Dario Garigliotti, University of Stavanger, Norway
• Anastasia Giachanou, Valencia, Spain
• Frank Hopfgartner, The University of Sheffield, UK
• Julia Kiseleva, University of Amsterdam
• Udo Kruschwitz, University of Essex, UK
• Jochen Leidner, Refinitiv Labs & University of Sheffield, UK
• Haiming Liu, University of Bedfordshire, UK
• Edgar Meij, Bloomberg, UK
• Elaheh Momeni, University of Vienna, Austria
• Raymond Ng, Signal AI, UK
• Arian Pasquali, University of Porto, Portugal
• Filipa Peleja, Vodafone Research, Portugal
• Barbara Poblete, University of Chile, Chile
• Damiano Spina, RMIT University, Australia
• Andreas Spitz, Heidelberg University
• Arkaitz Zubiaga, University of Warwick, UK

Manuscripts will be reviewed by at least three members of the PC,
with final acceptance decisions made by the organizers. Participants
of accepted papers will be given 15 minutes for short presentations.
All papers will also be presented in an interactive poster session to
encourage more discussion and engagement. We plan to publish the
proceedings with CEUR workshop proceedings.2 This guarantees
timely publication (specifically, in time for the workshop) and a
wide dissemination due to CEUR’s open-access policy.
It is crucial for the success of the workshop to attract submissions
on relevant topics outlined in Section 1 from multiple communities.
The key for that is the promotional activities that we have conducted
to reach out to the relevant researchers and stakeholders in those
communities. We believe that the diverse setup of the organization
and the paper reviewers described in the next section will help
us immensely in the reach out and to attract a large number of
paper submission as in the previous versions of the workshop [1, 5].
Indeed, as a result of these promotional activities, we have attracted
a total of 21 paper submissions.

4

KEYNOTES AND PANEL

We aim to have at least two keynote speakers to share their experiences from the journalistic space and the application of IR
technologies for news processing. Aron Pilhofer, Chair in Journalism Innovation at Temple University, has kindly confirmed to
give a keynote at the workshop. In his keynote, he will focus on
the application of technology to journalism in general and to local
journalism in particular: “What can we do for the 99 percent of
journalists, who are overworked, under-resourced at the local level”
In addition, we will also have a panel with representation from
the journalism world, as well as the academic and commercial
perspectives. For the panel we aim to have the following experts:

REFERENCES
[1] Dyaa Albakour, David Corney, Julio Gonzalo, Miguel Martinez1, Barbara Poblete,
and Andreas Vlachos. 2018. Report on the 2Nd International Workshop on Recent
Trends in News Information Retrieval (NewsIR’18). SIGIR Forum 52, 1 (Aug. 2018),
140–146. https://doi.org/10.1145/3274784.3274799
[2] Bill Dolan, Chris Quirk, and Chris Brockett. 2004. Unsupervised construction of
large paraphrase corpora: Exploiting massively parallel news sources. In Proceedings of the 20th international conference on Computational Linguistics. Association
for Computational Linguistics, 350.
[3] Knight FoundationLLC. 2018.
Disinformation, ‘Fake News’ and Influence Campaigns on Twitter.
https://www.knightfoundation.org/reports/
disinformation-fake-news-and-influence-campaigns-on-twitter
[4] David D Lewis, Yiming Yang, Tony G Rose, and Fan Li. 2004. RCV1: A new
benchmark collection for text categorization research. Journal of machine learning
research 5, Apr (2004), 361–397.
[5] Miguel Martinez, Udo Kruschwitz, Gabriella Kazai, Frank Hopfgartner, David
Corney, Ricardo Campos, and Dyaa Albakour. 2016. Report on the 1st international
workshop on recent trends in news information retrieval (NewsIR16). In ACM
SIGIR Forum, Vol. 50. ACM, 58–67.
[6] Elisa Shearer. 2018.
Social media outpaces print newspapers.
http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2018/12/10/
social-media-outpaces-print-newspapers-in-the-u-s-as-a-news-source/
[7] Aron Smith. 2009.
The Internet as a Source of Political News
and Information.
http://www.pewinternet.org/2009/04/15/
the-internet-as-a-source-of-political-news-and-information/
[8] Erik F Tjong Kim Sang and Fien De Meulder. 2003. Introduction to the CoNLL-2003
shared task: Language-independent named entity recognition. In Proceedings of
the seventh conference on Natural language learning at HLT-NAACL 2003-Volume 4.
Association for Computational Linguistics, 142–147.
[9] Onur Varol, Emilio Ferrara, Clayton A Davis, Filippo Menczer, and Alessandro
Flammini. 2017. Online human-bot interactions: Detection, estimation, and characterization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.03107 (2017).

• Jochen Leidner, Director of Research at Refinitiv Ltd., formerly the Financial & Risk division of Thomson Reuters).
He is also a Royal Academy of Engineering Visiting Professor of Data Analytics at the University of Sheffield, Guest
Lecturer at the University of Zurich and Scientific Expert for
the European Commission.
• Julio Gonzalo, a professor at UNED, Mardid. Julio has recently been co-organizer of the RepLab Evaluation Campaign
for Online Reputation Management System.
• Tom Philips, Editor of automated factchecking at UK’s leading fact-checking charity Full Fact.

5

ORGANIZERS AND PROGRAMME
COMMITTEE

After running NewsIR for the first time in 2016, some co-organisers
left space for new ones to join and lead the second workshop in
2018. This is inline with the spirit of the workshop; reaching out to
new communities and increasing the diversity. For our proposed
2 http://ceur-ws.org

1431

