Workshop

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information
Retrieval and Natural Language Processing
for Digital Libraries (BIRNDL 2019)
Muthu Kumar Chandrasekaran

GESIS – Leibniz Institute for the Social
Sciences, Germany
philipp.mayr@gesis.org

Dayne Freitag

Dragomir Radev

SRI International, San Diego, USA
freitag@ai.sri.com

Michihiro Yasunaga

Philipp Mayr

SRI International, Menlo Park, USA
cmkumar087@gmail.com

Yale University, USA
dragomir.radev@yale.edu

ABSTRACT

1

Yale University, USA
michi@yale.edu

Min-Yen Kan

School of Computing, National University of
Singapore, Singapore
kanmy@comp.nus.edu.sg

INTRODUCTION

The deluge of scholarly publication poses a challenge for scholars
find relevant research and policy makers to seek in-depth information and understand research impact. Information retrieval (IR),
natural language processing (NLP) and bibliometrics could enhance
scholarly search, retrieval and user experience, but their use in digital libraries is not widespread. To address this gap, we propose the
4th Joint Workshop on BIRNDL and the 5t h CL-SciSumm Shared
Task. We seek to foster collaboration among researchers in NLP, IR
and Digital Libraries (DL), and to stimulate the development of new
methods in NLP, IR, recommendation systems and scientometrics
toward improved scholarly document understanding, analysis, and
retrieval at scale.

Over the past several years and at premier conferences, BIRNDL [2,
5, 6], together with its parent workshops, has established itself as
the primary interdisciplinary venue for cross-pollination of NLP,
IR and DL research. We observe that while some researchers are
active in all three communities, the main discourse in these fields
consist of different approaches to solve similar problems. A common forum for discussion benefits all communities, by catalyzing
new ideas and collaborations and facilitates knowledge transfer. A
recent description of the symbiotic relationship that exists among
bibliometrics, IR and NLP was presented by Wolfram at the first
BIRNDL workshop at JCDL 2016 [9].
The goal of the BIRNDL workshop at SIGIR 2019 is to engage the
IR community in the open problems in Big Sciences. Big Science
refers to the large, cross-domain digital repositories which index
CCS CONCEPTS
research papers, such as the ArXiv, ACM Digital Library, PubMed,
• Information systems → Information retrieval; Link and coACL Anthology, IEEE database, Web of Science and Google Scholar.
citation analysis; • Applied computing → Digital libraries and
Currently, digital libraries collect and allow access to digital paarchives.
pers and their metadata—inclusive of citations—. However, they
do not analyze and further utilize the items they index. The volKEYWORDS
ume of scholarly publication poses a challenge for scholars in their
search for relevant literature. Finding relevant scholarly literature
Scientometrics; Information Retrieval; Digital Libraries; NLP; Sumis the key focus of the workshop and sets the agenda for tools and
marization; Information Extraction; Citation analysis
approaches to be discussed and evaluated at BIRNDL.
The 4t h BIRNDL workshop1 and the 5t h CL-SciSumm Shared
ACM Reference Format:
Task will be a follow-up to the previous editions co-located with
Muthu Kumar Chandrasekaran, Philipp Mayr, Michihiro Yasunaga, Dayne
2
Freitag, Dragomir Radev, and Min-Yen Kan. 2019. Joint Workshop on Bibliometric- SIGIR ’18 where 6 research papers and 11 shared task system
enhanced Information Retrieval and Natural Language Processing for Digital
papers were presented3 [6]. BIRNDL at SIGIR ’19 has attracted
Libraries (BIRNDL 2019). In Proceedings of the 42nd International ACM SIGIR
25 submissions to the research track and 16 registrations to the
Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR
CL-SciSumm Shared Task track. It will also host two keynotes
’19), July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 3 pages.
from acdemia and industry. BIRNDL at SIGIR ’19 will be a full-day
https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331650
workshop.
As in the previous editions, the CL-SciSumm Shared Task generated a lot of interest and participation, and all participants strongly
favored a follow-up this year. We have been regularly coordinating
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6172-9/19/07.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331650

1 http://wing.comp.nus.edu.sg/~birndl2019/

2 http://wing.comp.nus.edu.sg/birndl-sigir2018/
3 http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-2132/

1441

Workshop

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

workshop series at premier IR and Information Systems venues—
such as the Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval (BIR) workshop series since 2014 [8] at ECIR and the NLPIR4DL workshop at
ACL-IJCNLP, 2009.
Papers and talks at the workshop will incorporate insights from
IR, NLP and bibliometrics to develop new techniques to address
the open problems in scholarly digital libraries and studying impact of big science, such as evidence-based searching, measurement
of research quality, relevance and impact, the emergence and decline of research problems, identification of scholarly relationships
and influences and applied problems such as language translation,
question-answering and summarization. We will also address the
need for established, standardized baselines, evaluation metrics and
standardised reference datasets. Towards the purpose of evaluating
tools and technologies developed for digital libraries, we will organize the 5th CL-SciSumm Shared Task– based on the CL-SciSumm
corpus, comprising over 500 computational linguistics research
papers, interlinked through a citation network. In this iteration of
CL-SciSumm, we are increasing the size of our existing corpus by
one-fold through automated annotations.
This workshop will be relevant to scholars in computer and
information science, specialized in IR and NLP. It will also be of
importance to all stakeholders in the publication pipeline: implementers, publishers and policymakers. Today’s publishers continue
to provide new ways to support their consumers in disseminating
and retrieving the right published works to their readership. Formal citation metrics are increasingly a factor in decision-making
by universities and funding bodies worldwide, making the need for
research in applying these metrics more pressing.

2

the data; metadata and documentation on its organization, content,
and quality; and descriptions of possible use cases.

2.1

Tentative Schedule of Events

Along with research paper presentations, the workshop will host
two keynotes. Prof. Bonnie Webber (University of Edinburgh) will
deliver the Distinguished Keynote while Alex Wade from the ChanZuckerberg Initiative (CZI)’s Meta, will deliver a second keynote on
“Personalized feed/query-formulation, predictive impact, and ranking”. The schedule will include an overview of Shared Task design
and results, followed by presentations from selected participants,
with a poster session to accommodate additional Shared Task and
research participants. The workshop will end with planning and
discussion to decide on future directions and improvements to the
workshop and the Shared Task.

2.2

The CL-SciSumm Shared Task

CL-SciSumm is the first medium-scale (over 500 annotated documents as of today) shared task on scientific document summarization in the computational linguistics domain. The 5t h CL-SciSumm4
follows up on the successful previous editions conducted as a part
of the BIRNDL workshops since 2016 and as a Pilot Task at the
Text Analysis Conference 2014 (TAC 2014). This task is expected
to be of interest to a broad community, including those working
in CL and NLP, especially in the sub-disciplines of text summarization, discourse structure in scholarly discourse, paraphrase, textual
entailment and text simplification. Since the CL-SciSumm ’18, we
have started working with collaborators at Yale University and enriched our dataset with metadata from the ACL Anthology Network
(AAN)5 , doubling the size of our corpus.
For CL-SciSumm ’19 we encourage NLP research groups to field
systems using deep learning and other recent but data hungry methods to push the state-of-the-art. To this end, we are introducing a
new dataset which expands the annotated CL-SciSumm corpus [10].
Further we are also introducing distantly supervised corpus of several thousands citance-reference sentence pairs to train systems for
Task 1a.
In the CL-SciSumm 2018 Shared Task, fourteen teams registered,
out of which eleven teams submitted their systems for evaluation
and presented their results at BIRNDL [6]. Sixteen teams have CLSciSumm 2019 and are working towards submissions. The Shared
Task results will be published in a overview paper as part of the
BIRNDL ’19 proceedings.
The Shared Task comprises three sub-tasks in automatic scholarly document summarization on a corpus of research papers. Systems are provided with a Reference Paper (RP) and 10 or more
Citing Papers (CPs) that all contain citations to the RP. In each CP,
the text spans (i.e., citances) that pertain to a particular citation to
the RP are annotated. Systems are tasked to identify text spans in
the RP that citances in CP are referring to (Task 1a); then assign
one of the four discourse facets to identified reference span (Task
1b); and finally output a summary of the RP using outputs from
Task 1 and other text extracted from RP.

WORKSHOP TOPICS AND FORMAT

By design, BIRNDL is an inclusive and diverse venue, in terms of
both constituency and research. To promote a diverse constituency,
we explicitly encourage female first authors. We invite stimulating
research on topics including, but not limited to, full-text analysis,
including multilingual analysis, IR methods for DL, and applications of citation-based NLP. Specific examples of fields of interest
include:
– Infrastructure for scientific text mining and IR,
– Semantic and network-based indexing, search and navigation in
structured text,
– Bibliometrics and citation analysis,
– Discourse modeling and argument mining,
– Summarization and question-answering for scholarly DLs,
– Recommendation for scholarly papers, reviewers, citations and
publication venues,
– Measurement of document quality and impact,
– Information extraction and parsing tasks on scientific documents,
– Science knowledge base population (Sci-KBP) and inference,
– Automated discovery and maintenance of metadata and controlled
vocabularies,
– Disambiguation and data quality assurance in scholarly DLs.
Importantly, to address the scarcity of validated datasets in this
area, we also invite papers describing new and existing datasets.
Submissions in this track will include instructions for accessing

4 http://wing.comp.nus.edu.sg/~cl-scisumm2019/
5 http://clair.eecs.umich.edu/aan/index.php

1442

Workshop

3

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

Since 2016 we have been maintaining the “Bibliometric-enhancedIR Bibliography” 6 which is a bibliography of all scientific papers
that appear in BIR, BIRNDL and related workshops and journal
special issues.

RELATED WORKSHOPS

Our workshop is a continuation of several previous ones on similar topics. We present a summary of some relevant recent events,
which underpin our claim of the workshop topic being spot-on and
relevant.
The following related workshops (NLPIR4DL, BIR, CLBib and the
CL Summarization Pilot Task) have been organized by the BIRNDL
organisers.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank SRI International and Chan-Zuckerberg Initiative (CZI) for their
generous support in funding the organization of the CL-SciSumm Shared
Task 2019. CZI sponsored Alex Wade’s keynote. We immensely than Prof.
Dragomir Radev and Michihiro Yasunaga from Yale University for sharing
the SciSummNet dataset for CL-SciSumm 2019 and co-organising this time.
This work by Philipp Mayr was partly funded by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) under grant number MA 3964/10-1, the “Establishing
Contextual Dataset Retrieval - transferring concepts from document to
dataset retrieval (ConDATA)” project.
We are also grateful to the co-organizers of the 1s t BIRNDL workshop
- Guillaume Cabanac, Ingo Frommholz, and Dietmar Wolfram, for their
continued support and involvement.

• 1st BIRNDL at JCDL, 2nd and 3r d BIRNDL at SIGIR ’17,
Tokyo and ’18, Ann Arbor,
• 1st Workshop on text and citation analysis for scholarly
digital libraries (NLPIR4DL) was held in conjunction with
ACL-IJCNLP 2009, Singapore. It comprised 11 full papers
(acceptance rate: 21%).
• 8th Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval (BIR2019) at ECIR 2019. The focus of the BIR workshops at ECIR (2014, 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018 and 2019) was
on research papers in information retrieval, information
seeking, science modelling, network analysis, and digital libraries, applying insights from bibliometrics, scientometrics,
and informetrics.
• 2nd Workshop on Mining Scientific Papers: Computational
Linguistics and Bibliometrics (CLBib) at ISSI 2017 brought
together researchers to study the ways Bibliometrics can
benefit from large-scale text analytics and sense mining of
scientific papers, thus exploring the interdisciplinarity of
Bibliometrics and NLP.
• The Computational Linguistics Pilot Task, held as a part of
the Biomedical Summarization track, at TAC 2014 [4], where
the results from 3 system papers were presented.

4

REFERENCES
[1] Iana Atanassova, Marc Bertin, and Philipp Mayr. 2019. Editorial: Mining Scientific
Papers: NLP-enhanced Bibliometrics. Frontiers in Research Metrics and Analytics
(2019). https://doi.org/10.3389/frma.2019.00002
[2] Guillaume Cabanac, Muthu Kumar Chandrasekaran, Ingo Frommholz, Kokil
Jaidka, Min-Yen Kan, Philipp Mayr, and Dietmar Wolfram. 2016. Report on the
Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and Natural
Language Processing for Digital Libraries (BIRNDL 2016). SIGIR Forum 50, 2
(2016), 36–43. http://sigir.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/p036.pdf
[3] Guillaume Cabanac, Ingo Frommholz, and Philipp Mayr. 2018. Bibliometricenhanced information retrieval: preface. Scientometrics 116, 2 (2018), 1225–1227.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-018-2861-0
[4] Kokil Jaidka, Muthu Kumar Chandrasekaran, Beatriz Fisas Elizalde, Rahul Jha,
Christopher Jones, Min-Yen Kan, Ankur Khanna, Diego Molla-Aliod, Dragomir R
Radev, Francesco Ronzano, et al. 2014. The computational linguistics summarization pilot task. In Proceedings of Text Analysis Conference. Gaithersburg, USA.
[5] Philipp Mayr, Muthu Kumar Chandrasekaran, and Kokil Jaidka. 2017. Report on
the Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and Natural
Language Processing for Digital Libraries (BIRNDL 2017). SIGIR Forum 51, 2
(2017), 107–113. http://sigir.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/p107.pdf
[6] Philipp Mayr, Muthu Kumar Chandrasekaran, and Kokil Jaidka. 2018. Report
on the 3rd Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and
Natural Language Processing for Digital Libraries (BIRNDL 2018). SIGIR Forum
52, 2 (2018), 105–110. http://sigir.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/p105.pdf
[7] Philipp Mayr, Ingo Frommholz, Guillaume Cabanac, Muthu Kumar Chandrasekaran, Kokil Jaidka, Min-Yen Kan, and Dietmar Wolfram. 2018. Introduction
to the Special Issue on Bibliometric-Enhanced Information Retrieval and Natural
Language Processing for Digital Libraries (BIRNDL). International Journal on Digital Libraries 19, 2-3 (2018), 107–111. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00799-017-0230-x
[8] Philipp Mayr, Andrea Scharnhorst, Birger Larsen, Philipp Schaer, and Peter
Mutschke. 2014. Bibliometric-Enhanced Information Retrieval. In 36th European
Conference on IR Research, ECIR 2014, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, April 13-16,
2014. Proceedings, Maarten et al. de Rijke (Ed.). Springer International Publishing,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 798–801. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-060286_99
[9] Dietmar Wolfram. 2016. Bibliometrics, Information Retrieval and Natural Language Processing: Natural Synergies to Support Digital Library Research. In Proc.
of the BIRNDL Workshop 2016. 6–13. http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1610/paper1.pdf
[10] Michihiro Yasunaga, Jungo Kasai, Rui Zhang, Alexander R Fabbri Irene Li Dan,
and Friedman Dragomir R Radev. 2019. ScisummNet: A Large Annotated Corpus
and Content-Impact Models for Scientific Paper Summarization with Citation
Networks. (2019).

OUTLOOK

BIRNDL is an effort to bring together all interested parties working
in the digital library space. It has always been an interdisciplinary
venue to benefit Bibliometrics, IR and NLP. Previous editions of
BIRNDL have created a greater impact than originally thought.
BIRNDL 2016, led to a special issue on “Bibliometric-Enhanced
Information Retrieval and Natural Language Processing for Digital
Libraries” with thirteen full journal papers, one of the largest special
issues in the International Journal on Digital Libraries (IJDL) [7]. Another special issue on “Bibliometric-enhanced Information retrieval
and Scientometrics” was published in Scientometrics in 2018 [3].
Recently, the Open Access journal Frontiers in Research Metrics and
Analytics published a Research Topic with seven research articles
on “Mining Scientific Papers: NLP-enhanced Bibliometrics” [1].
BIRNDL has a global presence with program committee memberships, submissions and participation across Europe, Asia, Australia
and the Americas; with scholarship from computer science and
social sciences; with scholarship from academia and industry. For a
future edition, we call upon the leaders in the field, to unite under
a common umbrella conference that represents the interests of all
the communities in the digital library and bibliometrics space.
Selected BIRNDL papers will be invited to a special issue on
“Mining Knowledge from Scientific Data” in the journal Expert
Systems. All other presenters are invited for an other special issue
in Scientometrics.

6 https://github.com/PhilippMayr/Bibliometric-enhanced-IR_Bibliography/

1443

