Short Research Papers 3C: Search

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

Revealing the Role of User Moods in Struggling Search Tasks
Luyan Xu

Xuan Zhou

Ujwal Gadiraju

DEKE Lab,
Renmin University of China
Beijing, China
xuluyan@ruc.edu.cn

School of Data Science & Engineering,
East China Normal University
Shanghai, China
zhou.xuan@outlook.com

L3S Research Center,
Leibniz Universität Hannover
Hannover, Germany
gadiraju@L3S.de

ABSTRACT

approaches have been studied in many different contexts of struggling search, with a variety of people and exploring a broad array
of insights in user-system interaction, user behavior analysis, and
task difficulty evaluation. However, few studies have taken into
account the role that a user’s mood plays in these processes.
Previous works have not explored the impact of user moods
on their perception of search struggle or satisfaction. Recently, researchers found the ‘difficulty’ in struggling search to be a function
of a searcher’s effort and gain, based largely on subjective feelings [17]. We draw inspiration from this work to analyze the role
of user moods in search.
To investigate whether and how user moods affect their search
performance and perception of difficulty in struggling search, we
conducted a crowdsourced user study. We recruited participants
(N=284) from a popular crowdsourcing platform called FigureEight1 . We used Pick-A-Mood (PAM), a character-based pictorial
scale, to gather self-reported user moods from workers [4]. We
investigated the effects of users’ moods on their perception of task
difficulty, and analyzed their search behavior. We compared user
performance in typical information retrieval (IR) tasks and that in
struggling text retrieval tasks (SST). In this paper, we address the
following research questions:
RQ1: What moods are participants in when they begin their
search session? We gathered user moods using PAM, and analyzed
these across 4 distinct mood categories.
RQ2: What is the effect of mood on participants’ search behavior
during the struggling search process? We logged and analyzed user
search behavior including queries, clicks and dwelling time.
RQ3: What is the effect of mood on participants’ perception
of task difficulty during the struggling search process? Through a
quantitative analysis of the difficulty scores which users assigned
to tasks, we investigated the influence of mood on users’ perception
of task difficulty.
RQ4: What is the effect of mood on typical IR tasks in comparison to struggling search tasks? We also measured the impact of
mood on typical IR tasks, drawing comparisons to our findings with
respect to struggling search tasks.

User-centered approaches have been extensively studied and used
in the area of struggling search. Related research has targeted key
aspects of users such as user satisfaction or frustration, and search
success or failure, using a variety of experimental methods including laboratory user studies, in-situ explicit feedback from searchers
and by using crowdsourcing. Such studies are valuable in advancing
the understanding of search difficulty from a user’s perspective,
and yield insights that can directly improve search systems and
their evaluation. However, little is known about how user moods
influence their interactions with a search system or their perception of struggling. In this work, we show that a user’s own mood
can systematically bias the user’s perception, and experience while
interacting with a search system and trying to satisfy an information need. People who are in activated-(un)pleasant moods tend
to issue more queries than people in deactivated or neutral moods.
Those in an unpleasant mood perceive a higher level of difficulty.
Our insights extend the current understanding of struggling search
tasks and have important implications on the design and evaluation
of search systems supporting such tasks.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems → Information retrieval; • Humancentered computing;

KEYWORDS
Struggling Search; Information Retrieval; Users; Mood
ACM Reference Format:
Luyan Xu, Xuan Zhou, and Ujwal Gadiraju. 2019. Revealing the Role of User
Moods in Struggling Search Tasks. In Proceedings of the 42nd International
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval
(SIGIR ’19), July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 4 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331353

1

INTRODUCTION

Methods have recently been developed to understand users’ struggle during search experiences and help them cope with the entailing
search difficulty. As a subject of scholarly attention, user-centered

2

RELATED LITERATURE

Although both mood and emotion are valenced affective responses,
prior work has elaborately discussed the difference between the
two [4]. Firstly, moods last longer than emotions [1, 14]. Secondly,
emotions are always targeted towards an event, person or object,
while moods are globally diffused [5]. Emotions are triggered by
explicit causes and monitor our environment, while moods have

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France
© 2019 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6172-9/19/07. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331353

1 http://www.figure-eight.com/

1249

Short Research Papers 3C: Search

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

3.2

combined causes and monitor our internal state [11]. Further, emotions are elicited by threats or opportunities [5], while moods are
responses to one’s overall position in general [12]. However, note
that moods and emotions are not entirely independent; they interact with each other dynamically. Accumulated emotions can lead
to specific moods, and moods can lower the degree of emotional
arousal [2].
Crowdsouring is increasingly being used to build reliable hybrid human-machine information systems [3] and to run humancentered experiments [19]. It has emerged as a feasible approach
to gather reliable relevance labels in the context of IR evaluation.
Platforms, such as FigureEight 2 or Amazon’s Mechanical Turk
(AMT) 3 , enable the gathering of vast amount of data from a large
population of workers within a short period of time and at a relatively low cost [6]. In this paper, we build on these substantial prior
works [1, 2, 5, 11, 12, 14], that have established an understanding
of moods and emotions to unearth analyze the role they play on
workers of microtask crowdsourcing platforms.

Tasks

To analyze how mood effects users’ search behavior in struggling
search tasks (SSTs), we formulated 10 struggling text retrieval tasks
from Wikipedia using a method from previous study [18]. We made
sure that the first interaction of the user with the system would not
directly yield the answer to the information need [9]. The generated
tasks are characterized by an open task description, accompanied by
uncertainty and ambiguity as postulated by Kules and Capra [10].
In addition, the tasks were designed such that searchers had to
search for multiple aspects describing the information need [9]. To
observe the difference between typical IR tasks and SST in terms of
the effect of user mood, we picked another 10 typical IR tasks from
previous work by Gadiraju et al. that was based on the TREC 2014
Web Track dataset4 [7]. Table 1 presents samples of the selected
typical IR tasks and the generated struggling text retrieval tasks.
All tasks are made publicly available5 .
Table 1: Examples of Traditional IR tasks and SST

3 METHOD AND SETUP
3.1 Measuring User Moods
To measure the mood of crowd workers in an intuitive and easy
manner, we use Pick-A-Mood (PAM), a character-based pictorial
scale for reporting moods [4]. Compared to other measures, this
is ideal for the microtask crowdsourcing context where time is of
essence, since it was specifically made to be suitable for design
research applications in which people have little time or motivation
to report their moods. The scale has been tested with a general
population (people from 31 different nationalities in the validation
study), revealing that the expressions presented by the visual characters are correctly interpreted (see Figure 1). PAM has been used
in a variety of research settings including quality of experience
research [15] and in education [13], illustrating the robustness of
the tool.

TASK_TYPE

Sample of Tasks Generated in the Lab

Typical
IR Tasks

Which astronomer is the Hubble Space Telescope named after?
Which is the highest summit of the Rocky Mountains?

SST

Did the fall of Dien Bien Phu upset the balance of forces present
in Indochina in 1954?
Which bonds do nucleases hydrolyze to cut DNA strands?

3.3

Experimental Setup and Data Collection

We built TaskGenie6 , a customized online search engine capable
of logging user behavior, on top of the Wikipedia Search API7 . By
default, to ensure that retrieved documents are consistent in their
credibility and coverage, we specify Wikipedia as the target search
domain. We logged user activity on the platform including queries,
clicks, users’ dwelling time and their perception of task difficulty
using PHP/Javascript and the jQuery library.
We recruited 300 participants (94 female, 206 male, with their age
ranging from 18 to 57) from FigureEight 8 , a premier crowdsourcing
platform. We restricted the participation to workers from Englishspeaking countries to ensure that they understood the task and
instructions adequately. To ensure reliability of the resulting data,
we restricted the participation to Level-3 workers 9 .At the onset,
workers were informed that the task entailed ‘searching the web to
find information’. Workers willing to participate were first asked to
respond to a few general questions pertaining to their gender, age
and select a mood that could describe their state, before being redirected to the aforementioned external platform, TaskGenie. Workers
were randomly assigned either a a struggling search task or a typical
IR task. During the task completion process, all interactions of the
users within the TaskGenie framework were logged. After finishing
the task, searchers were asked to give feedback from the following
perspectives - (1) Task Comparison (whether or not the users found
the question difficult in comparison to their usual experience); (2)

Figure 1: Pick-A-Mood scale to measure the self-reported
mood of users before they enter the TaskGenie framework.

4 http://www.trec.nist.gov/act_part/tracks/web/web2014.topics.txt
5 https://bitbucket.org/ielool/mood_taskset/
6 http://waps.io/study/?uid=123
7 https://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php

2 Figure8

8 Figure8

– http://figure-eight.com/

9 Level-3

3 http://www.mturk.com/

1250

– http://figure-eight.com/
contributors on Figure8 are workers of the highest quality.

Short Research Papers 3C: Search

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

Task Difficulty Score (how difficult / complex the users found the
question to be on a sliding scale of 1 to 100). We divide the task
difficulty scale into five equal parts using the following labels - Easy
(1-20), Moderate (21-40), Challenging (41-60), Demanding (61-80),
Strenuous (81-100). Figure 2 depicts the workflow of participants in
the experimental setup orchestrating informational search sessions.

The 8 non-neutral moods measured by PAM, can be grouped into
four mood categories [16]; activated-pleasant (excited, cheerful),
deactivated-pleasant (relaxed, calm), activated-unpleasant
(tense, irritated), and deactivated-unpleasant (bored, sad).
Among the 284 workers, 147 workers (51%) were found to be in
activated-pleasant moods (95 were cheerful and 52 were excited), 62
workers (22%) were in deactivated-pleasant moods (35 were calm, 27
were relaxed). 20 workers (7%) were in activated-unpleasant moods
(16 were tense, 4 were irritated) and 33 (12%) were in deactivatedunpleasant moods (19 were sad, 14 were bored). 22 workers (8%)
claimed to be in a neutral mood. Thus, more than half of the workers
were in activated-pleasant moods, while there were nearly 30% of
the workers who were in neutral or unpleasant moods.

difficulty) in the informational search sessions corresponding to
the 10 struggling search tasks (SST).
Queries. During the search sessions corresponding to the 20 tasks,
users issued over two queries on average. To understand the effect
of users moods on the number of queries issued by the users, we
conducted a one-way ANOVA. We found that people who were in
activated moods issued more queries than people in deactivated
or neutral moods. Results revealed a significant effect of moods
on the number of queries issued by users at the p < .001 level,
F (8, 165) = 4.38. Post-hoc comparisons using the Tukey-HSD test
revealed that the number of issued queries in activated-pleasant
mood (‘cheerful’ and ‘excited’) were found to be significantly more
than those pertaining to the mood of ‘neutral’ at the p < .001 level.
Clicks. We analyzed the clicks of users on results corresponding
to each of the queries they entered within search sessions. We note
that users clicked on just over 355 links on the search results and
on more than 1 result link per query on average. We conducted a
one-way ANOVA to investigate the effect of different moods on
the number of clicks fired by users. We did not find a significant
difference in the number of clicks fired by users across the 9 types
of moods. We also found no significant linear relationship between
the mood and the number of clicks using Pearson’s R.
Duration. We analyzed the session length10 of users in informational search sessions corresponding to the different moods. We
found that the average session length of solving a task is 318s (M =
318, SD = 147) long. To understand the effect of the 9 types of moods
on the session length exhibited by users, we conducted a one-way
ANOVA. Results revealed no significant effect of the moods on
sessions length. We also analyzed the difference between session
length of users and the positive / negative moods. We found no
significant difference between these variables, suggesting that types
of mood do not directly influence the the session length of users.
Perception of Difficulty. We analyzed users’ perception of their
search based on the difficulty ratings we collected at the end of
their search session on a sliding scale of 1-100 as described earlier.
After being assigned a task at random some users chose to change
their tasks once. We found that users in activated-pleasant (excited
and cheerful) moods were more inclined to switch the tasks they
were assigned. Results of a two-tailed T-test confirmed this significant difference: t(173) = 2.81, at p < .01 level. From this we note
that searchers in activated-pleasant moods tend to be more active
when interacting with the search engine. 72% of the users who
completed the tasks claimed that the tasks they completed were
difficult tasks in comparison to their typical search experience. To
understand whether users moods influenced their perception in
this self-reported comparison, we conducted a one-way between
users ANOVA. We found no significant effect of mood on how
participants compared the struggling search tasks and their typical searching experience. On average, the perceived task difficulty
corresponding to the 20 tasks was found to be 59.7; challenging
(M = 59.7, SD = 21.9). To understand the effect of the 9 different
moods on the perception of difficulty, we conducted a one-way
between users ANOVA. Results revealed a significant effect of user

4.2

10 For

Figure 2: Workflow of participants in the experimental
setup orchestrating informational search sessions within
the TaskGenie framework.
To ensure the reliability of responses and the behavioral data
thus produced in the search sessions, we filtered out 16 workers
who entered no queries or didn’t finish the whole process. We got
284 workers of which 174 solved a struggling search tasks and 110
solved typical IR tasks. The analysis and results presented hereafter
are based on these 284 workers.

4

RESULTS AND ANALYSIS

In this section, we aim to analyze the effect of moods on users’
searching process in SSTs and typical IR tasks based on a variety
of aspects. Note that to control for Type-I error inflation in our
multiple comparisons (presented in this section), we used the Holm
Bonferroni correction for family-wise error rate (FWER) [8], at the
significance level of α < .05.

4.1

What Mood Were the Users In?

How Mood Affects Struggling Search?

a given topic and user, we measured the session length as the time from which
the first query was entered in TaskGenie by the user after the calibration test, until the
time at which the last web page accessed by the user was active before the post-session
test. Note that users were allowed to carry out only one search session.

We analyzed how different kinds of mood influenced the search
behavior of users (i.e. query, clicks, duration, user perception of

1251

Short Research Papers 3C: Search

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

moods on the Task Difficulty Score across the 9 types of moods
at p < .01 level; F (8, 165) = 2.38. Post-hoc comparisons using
the Tukey-HSD test revealed that people in activated-unpleasant
and deactivated-unpleasant mood reported a higher perceived difficulty score. In addition, the difficulty score pertaining to users in
a ‘sad’ (deactivated-pleasant) mood was found to be significantly
higher that that of those in a ‘cheerful’ (activated-pleasant) mood,
at p < 0.01 level.

4.3

search tasks showed that mood has a greater overall impact on
users’ perception of task difficulty in case of struggling search tasks
than in typical IR tasks. This presents us a new perspective from
which we can distinguish struggling search tasks and typical IR
search tasks through user logs analysis.

5

The primary goal of our research was to explore whether and how
users’ mood influences their search behavior. Based on the PickA-Mood pictorial scale, we investigated the effect of mood on participants’ search behavior (i.e. queries, clicks and dwelling time),
and on their perception of task difficulty. We also compared the
effect of mood on typical IR tasks and SSTs. Our findings showed
that in struggling search tasks user moods can affect the number
of queries fired by searchers and their perception of task difficulty.
We expect that our findings will help in reducing mood-related bias
in the evaluation, analysis and study of user behavior in SSTs.

Impact of Moods on IR tasks vs. SST

We also investigated the effect of mood on users carrying out typical
IR tasks, to draw a comparison with those carrying out SST.
We found that on average users collectively fired one to two
queries across each of the 10 typical IR tasks. We conducted a oneway ANOVA to investigate the effect of moods on the number of
queries fired in the typical IR tasks. Results showed a significant
effect of different kinds of moods on the number of queries issued
by users at p < .01 level; F (8, 101) = 3.42. Post-hoc comparisons
using the Tukey-HSD test revealed that the number of queries
issued by workers in an ‘irritated’ mood was significantly more
than those in a ‘neutral’ mood at p < .05 level. Similar to how
moods effect SST, in typical IR tasks we found that people who
were in activated-pleasant and activated-unpleasant moods tend
to issue more queries than people in a neutral mood. Participants’
perception of task difficulty for typical IR tasks was found to be 35
(M = 35, SD = 25). In contrast to what we found in struggling search
tasks, where user moods affected their perception of difficulty of
the SSTs, we found that user moods do not affect the perception of
difficulty in typical IR tasks. This suggests that if the information
need can be relatively easily satisfied, user moods do not affect their
perception of task difficulty.
We note that users in total fired 141 clicks and chained around 1
link on average, and spent around 220s on solving one typical IR
task. We found no significant effect of mood on the number of clicks
and duration time through one-way ANOVA test. We also found
no significant linear relationship between the mood and these two
parameters using Pearson’s R.

4.4

CONCLUSION

REFERENCES
[1] Christopher Beedie, Peter Terry, and Andrew Lane. 2005. Distinctions between
emotion and mood. Cognition & Emotion 19, 6 (2005), 847–878.
[2] Richard J Davidson. 1994. On emotion, mood, and related affective constructs.
The nature of emotion: Fundamental questions (1994), 51–55.
[3] Gianluca Demartini, Djellel Eddine Difallah, Ujwal Gadiraju, Michele Catasta,
et al. 2017. An introduction to hybrid human-machine information systems.
Foundations and Trends® in Web Science 7, 1 (2017), 1–87.
[4] Pieter MA Desmet, Martijn H Vastenburg, and Natalia Romero. 2016. Mood
measurement with Pick-A-Mood: review of current methods and design of a
pictorial self-report scale. Journal of Design Research 14, 3 (2016), 241–279.
[5] Nico H Frijda et al. 1994. Varieties of affect: Emotions and episodes, moods, and
sentiments. (1994).
[6] Ujwal Gadiraju, Sebastian Möller, Martin Nöllenburg, Dietmar Saupe, Sebastian
Egger-Lampl, Daniel Archambault, and Brian Fisher. 2017. Crowdsourcing versus the laboratory: towards human-centered experiments using the crowd. In
Crowdsourcing and Human-Centered Experiments. Springer, 6–26.
[7] Ujwal Gadiraju, Ran Yu, Stefan Dietze, and Peter Holtz. 2018. Analyzing Knowledge Gain of Users in Informational Search Sessions on the Web. In CHIIR 2018.
ACM, 2–11.
[8] Sture Holm. 1979. A simple sequentially rejective multiple test procedure. Scandinavian journal of statistics (1979), 65–70.
[9] Bill Kules and Robert Capra. 2008. Creating exploratory tasks for a faceted search
interface. Proc. of HCIR 2008 (2008), 18–21.
[10] Bill Kules and Robert Capra. 2009. Designing exploratory search tasks for
user studies of information seeking support systems. In Proceedings of the 9th
ACM/IEEE-CS joint conference on Digital libraries. ACM, 419–420.
[11] William N Morris. 2012. Mood: The frame of mind. Springer Sci. & Business
Media.
[12] Jesse J Prinz. 2004. Gut reactions: A perceptual theory of emotion. Oxford UP.
[13] Cesar Vandevelde, Francis Wyffels, Maria-Cristina Ciocci, Bram Vanderborght,
and Jelle Saldien. 2016. Design and evaluation of a DIY construction system for
educational robot kits. International Journal of Technology and Design Education
26, 4 (2016), 521–540.
[14] Philippe Verduyn, Iven Van Mechelen, and Francis Tuerlinckx. 2011. The relation
between event processing and the duration of emotional experience. Emotion 11,
1 (2011), 20.
[15] Bjørn J Villa, Katrien De Moor, Poul E Heegaard, and Anders Instefjord. 2013.
Investigating Quality of Experience in the context of adaptive video streaming:
findings from an experimental user study. Akademika forlag Stavanger, Norway
(2013).
[16] David Watson and Auke Tellegen. 1985. Toward a consensual structure of mood.
Psychological bulletin 98, 2 (1985), 219.
[17] Barbara Wildemuth, Luanne Freund, and Elaine G. Toms. 2014. Untangling search
task complexity and difficulty in the context of interactive information retrieval
studies. Journal of Documentation 70, 6 (2014), 1118–1140.
[18] Luyan Xu and Xuan Zhou. 2019. Generating Tasks for Study of Struggling Search.
In Proceedings of the 2019 CHIIR. ACM, 267–270.
[19] Ran Yu and Ujwal Gadiraju et al. 2018. Predicting User Knowledge Gain in
Informational Search Sessions. In the 41st International SIGIR. 75–84.

Discussion

We analyzed the user behavioral data to address the four RQs. In
our study, we found that more than half of the participants’ were in
activated-pleasant moods, although users were spread across the 9
moods in general. We found that user moods can affect the number
of queries issued. Users who were in activated-(un)pleasant moods
issued more queries than those in deactivated or neutral moods (i.e.
users in activated mood either intentionally explored the results or
struggled to find the information they were seeking). In struggling
search tasks, we found that mood can affect users’ perception of
the task difficulty: people in activated-pleasant moods were more
active in tackling a task; people in negative moods perceived a
higher difficulty and assigned higher task difficulty scores. This
suggests that users moods do play a role in the ‘struggle’ they experience while searching in SSTs. Considering user moods would be
helpful in eliminating mood related biases in both the experimental
setup and analysis of struggling search studies. Furthermore, the
comparison of the effects of mood between IR tasks and struggling

1252

