SIRIP 2: Recommendation, search and advertising

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

Beyond Keyword Targeting: An End-to-End Ad Retrieval
Framework for Sponsored Search
Xiao Yang*, Zhi Guo, Shouke Qin, Zongyao Ding
Baidu Inc.
{yangxiao04,guozhi,dingzongyao,qinshouke}@baidu.com

ABSTRACT

1

As the main revenue source for search engines, sponsored search
system retrieves and allocates ads to display on the search result
pages. Keyword targeting is widely adopted by most sponsored
search systems as the basic model for expressing the advertiser’s
business and retrieving related ads. In this targeting model, the advertiser should cautiously select lots of keywords relevant to their
business to optimize their campaigns, and the sponsored search
system retrieves ads based on the relevance between queries and
keywords. However, since there is a huge inventory of possible
queries and the new queries grow dramatically, it is a great challenge for advertisers to identify and collect lots of relevant bid
keywords for their ads, and it also takes great effort to select and
maintain high-quality keywords and set corresponding match types
for them. In the meantime, the keyword targeting leads to a multistage retrieval architecture as it contains the matching between
query and keywords and the matching between keywords and ads.
The retrieval funnel based on keyword targeting cannot achieve
straightforward and optimal matching between search queries and
ads. Consequently, traditional keyword targeting method gradually
becomes the bottleneck of optimizing advertisers’ campaigns and
improving the monetization of search ads.
In this paper, we present an end-to-end ad retrieval framework
for sponsored search. This framework can break the limits of keyword targeting and can achieve direct matching from query to related ads. The framework has been deployed at Baidu’s sponsored
search system and the experimental result validates its effectiveness. We will describe the design and architecture of this framework,
and hope that this framework can give some inspiration for the
sponsored search industry.

Keyword targeting is the key to the business model of sponsored
search and has more than 20 years of history. Nowadays, the major
search engines have billions of search queries each day and the new
queries grow dramatically. As the search engine has massive and
various queries and the search volume changes dynamically, it poses
huge challenges for advertisers in the selection and maintenance
of relative keywords.
In the keyword targeting model, the keyword is used as the intermediary between query and ad, and modern sponsored search
platform often adopts a multi-stage retrieval procedure which is
shown in Figure 1. The multi-stage retrieval procedure is a cascaded
funnel. As each stage has its respective optimization target and has
inevitable errors, these errors will be accumulated and enlarged by
stage-wise processing which will lead to losses of efficiency and
accuracy in retrieving related ads for target query. Moreover, as the
keywords are short texts and are the brief descriptions of advertisers’ business, it can’t provide sufficient information to diminish the
semantic gap between queries and advertisers’ business.
Are the keywords really necessary for sponsored search? To
liberate advertisers from the difficult keywords selection task and
increase the efficiency of search ads retrieval, in this paper, we will
present an end-to-end ad retrieval framework for sponsored search
in which the retrieval procedure is more straightforward and the
keywords are only used as supplementary information.

ACM Reference Format:
Xiao Yang*, Zhi Guo, Shouke Qin, Zongyao Ding. 2019. Beyond Keyword
Targeting: An End-to-End Ad Retrieval Framework for Sponsored Search.
In Proceedings of the 42nd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research
and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’19), July 21–25, 2019, Paris,
France. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.
3331429

INTRODUCTION

Figure 1: The multi-stage procedure of ad retrieval. The blue
part is the traditional keyword-based retrieval procedure,
and the green part is the end-to-end ad retrieval procedure.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6172-9/19/07. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331429

Based on this framework, we can break the limits of keyword
targeting, and more rich information can be used to represent the
advertiser’s business. The retrieval results of advertiser’s keywords
will be expanded and the ad retrieval task can be transformed
into model-based semantic matching problem. We deployed the
framework in Baidu’s sponsored search system and verify the effectiveness of the framework.

1385

SIRIP 2: Recommendation, search and advertising

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

Figure 2: The end-to-end ad retrieval framework.

2

way, we can use rich content information of queries and ads and
can retrieve ads for the target query just the same as the retrieval
methods of organic search results. We expand the query text with
its rewrites and clicked search results, and extract the content of the
landing page and ad creation as the ad text and expand it with its
related keywords and clicked creations. Based on these documents,
we develop an inverted index of ad documents, and retrieve the
ads for target query just as the traditional IR task. Meanwhile,
we also adopt the neural matching models such as [6] and [4] to
learn the representation and matching of queries and ads based on
training on the click and conversion feedback data. The term-based
representations from transformers[1] are also used by pre-training
on the corpus of queries and ads.

FRAMEWORK OVERVIEW

The overall architecture of the proposed framework is shown in
Figure 2. In this framework, we provide two types of methods to
expand the keyword-based ad retrieval and to break the limits of
multi-stage retrieval procedure of keyword targeting. Both methods
can retrieve related ads directly from the query.

2.1

Basic Requirements

To support the end-to-end ad retrieval framework, there are some
basic requirements, which are: (1) Basic data: Several sources of data
should be used to sufficiently represent the advertiser’s business
and the relationship between queries and ads, such as ad click data,
ad content data and search log data, and so on. (2) Bidding for the
new retrieved ads: Casting off the dependence of keyword-level bid
prices setted by advertiser is a necessary prerequisite for end-to-end
ad retrieval. We adopt the conversion rate based bid adjustment[5]
and the target-CPA bidding strategy[9] to generate the bid prices
for the new retrieved ads to ensure the ROI of advertisers. In the
meantime, if the bidding strategy can ensure the ROI, then the
match types of traditional keyword targeting are no more necessary
and can treat the advanced broad match as the default match type.

2.2

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Ruiwei Zhu, Junwei Zhang, Penghe Liu, Kai
Xu, Xinran Liu, Shaogui Ye, Yang Wang for their contributions.

REFERENCES
[1] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2018. Bert:
Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1810.04805 (2018).
[2] Yuxiao Dong, Nitesh V Chawla, and Ananthram Swami. 2017. metapath2vec:
Scalable representation learning for heterogeneous networks. In Proceedings of
the 23rd ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data
mining. ACM, 135–144.
[3] Will Hamilton, Zhitao Ying, and Jure Leskovec. 2017. Inductive representation
learning on large graphs. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
1024–1034.
[4] Liang Pang, Yanyan Lan, Jiafeng Guo, Jun Xu, Shengxian Wan, and Xueqi Cheng.
2016. Text matching as image recognition. In Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence.
[5] Benjamin Rey and Ashvin Kannan. 2010. Conversion rate based bid adjustment
for sponsored search. In Proceedings of the 19th international conference on World
wide web. ACM, 1173–1174.
[6] Yelong Shen, Xiaodong He, Jianfeng Gao, Li Deng, and Grégoire Mesnil. 2014.
Learning semantic representations using convolutional neural networks for web
search. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on World Wide Web.
ACM, 373–374.
[7] Yizhou Sun, Jiawei Han, Xifeng Yan, Philip S Yu, and Tianyi Wu. 2011. Pathsim:
Meta path-based top-k similarity search in heterogeneous information networks.
Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 4, 11 (2011), 992–1003.
[8] Xiao Yang, Tao Deng, Zhi Guo, and Zongyao Ding. 2017. Advertising keyword
recommendation based on supervised link prediction in multi-relational network.
In Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on World Wide Web Companion.
ACM, 863–864.
[9] Xiao Yang, Daren Sun, Ruiwei Zhu, Tao Deng, Zhi Guo, Zongyao Ding, Jiao Ding,
and Shouke Qin. 2019. AiAds: automated and intelligent advertising system for
sponsored search. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference
on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining. ACM, 1021–1030.

Ad Retrieval on Heterogeneous Network

Firstly, We can model the problem of ad retrieval as a networkbased mining task. Inspired by[8], we construct a heterogeneous
information network. As shown in Figure 2, we can use various
items such as keywords, ads, urls, intent tags, clicked search results,
etc, to connect the query nodes with the ad nodes. Based on this
network, we can adopt the meta-pah-based mining methods such
as [7] and network embedding models such as[2] to find potential unconnected query-ad pairs. Meanwhile, to find the suitable
retrieval results for long-tail nodes and incorporate the attributes
of nodes and edges in the network, we also adopt the graph neural
network models such as the GraphSAGE framework [3] to learn
the node embeddings. By combining the network mining results
and the learned node embeddings, we can retrieve the top-K ad
nodes directly for the target query node.

2.3

Ad Retrieval as Text Matching

Secondly, we can treat the ad retrieval task as the text matching
problem by representing the query and ad as text documents. In this

1386

