Short Research Papers 2C: Search

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

FAQ Retrieval using Query-Question Similarity and
BERT-Based Query-Answer Relevance
Wataru Sakata

Tomohide Shibata∗

LINE Corporation
wataru.sakata@linecorp.com

Kyoto University
CREST, JST
shibata@nlp.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Ribeka Tanaka

Sadao Kurohashi

Kyoto University
CREST, JST
tanaka@nlp.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Kyoto University
CREST, JST
NII, CRIS
kuro@nlp.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

ABSTRACT

1

Frequently Asked Question (FAQ) retrieval is an important task
where the objective is to retrieve an appropriate Question-Answer
(QA) pair from a database based on a user’s query. We propose a
FAQ retrieval system that considers the similarity between a user’s
query and a question as well as the relevance between the query
and an answer. Although a common approach to FAQ retrieval
is to construct labeled data for training, it takes annotation costs.
Therefore, we use a traditional unsupervised information retrieval
system to calculate the similarity between the query and question.
On the other hand, the relevance between the query and answer
can be learned by using QA pairs in a FAQ database. The recentlyproposed BERT model is used for the relevance calculation. Since
the number of QA pairs in FAQ page is not enough to train a model,
we cope with this issue by leveraging FAQ sets that are similar to
the one in question. We evaluate our approach on two datasets.
The first one is localgovFAQ, a dataset we construct in a Japanese
administrative municipality domain. The second is StackExchange
dataset, which is the public dataset in English. We demonstrate
that our proposed method outperforms baseline methods on these
datasets.

There are often frequently asked question (FAQ) pages with various
information on the web. A FAQ retrieval system, which takes a
user’s query and returns relevant QA pairs, is useful for navigating
these pages.
In FAQ retrieval tasks, it is standard to check similarities of
user’s query (q) to a FAQ’s question (Q) or to a question-answer
(QA) pair [2]. Many FAQ retrieval models use the dataset with the
relevance label between q and a QA pair. However, it costs a lot to
construct such labeled data. To cope with this problem, we adopt
an unsupervised method for calculating the similarity between a
query and a question.
Another promising approach is to check the q-A relevance trained
by QA pairs, which shows the plausibility of the FAQ answer for
the given q. Studies of community QA use a large number of QA
pairs for learning the q-A relevance [8, 11]. However, these methods
do not apply to FAQ retrieval task, because the size of QA entries
in FAQ is not enough to train a model generally. We address this
problem by collecting other similar FAQ sets to increase the size of
available QA data.
In this study, we propose a method that combines the q-Q similarity obtained by unsupervised model and the q-A relevance learned
from the collected QA pairs. Figure 1 shows the proposed model.
Previous studies show that neural methods (e.g., LSTM and CNN)
work effectively in learning q-A relevance. Here we use the recentlyproposed model, BERT [1]. BERT is a powerful model that applies
to a wide range of tasks and obtains the state-of-the-art results on
many tasks including GLUE [10] and SQuAD [4]. An unsupervised
retrieval system achieves high precision, but it is difficult to deal
with a gap between the expressions of q and Q. By contrast, since
BERT validates the relevance between q and A, it can retrieve an
appropriate QA pair even if there is a lexical gap between q and
Q. By combining the characteristics of two models, we achieve a
robust and high-performance retrieval system.
We conduct experiments on two datasets. The first one is the
localgovFAQ dataset, which we construct to evaluate our model in
a setting where other similar FAQ sets are available. It consists of
QA pairs collected from Japanese local government FAQ pages and
an evaluation set constructed via crowdsourcing. The second one is
the StackExchange dataset [2], which is the public dataset for FAQ

ACM Reference Format:
Wataru Sakata, Tomohide Shibata, Ribeka Tanaka, and Sadao Kurohashi.
2019. FAQ Retrieval using Query-Question Similarity and BERT-Based
Query-Answer Relevance. In Proceedings of the 42nd International ACM
SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’19), July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 4 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331326

∗ currently

at Yahoo Japan Corporation

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6172-9/19/07. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331326

1113

INTRODUCTION

Short Research Papers 2C: Search

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

User’s query：Can you please remove the wasp’s nest?
q-Q similarity
TSUBAKI

＋

• I’d like you to issue a copy of family register, but how much
does it cost?
• I’d like you to publish a maternal and child health handbook,
but what is required for the procedure?
• I’m thinking of purchasing a new housing, so I want to
know about the reduction measure.
• From which station does the pick-up bus of the Center Pool
come out?

q-A relevance
BERT

Target FAQ set
Q: How to throw out bulky trash?

A: Call the cleaning center.

Q: I want you to exterminate the
bee’s nest.

A: When there are bee nests
residen<al buildings…

…

…

Q: Will you remove the
honeycomb?

A: We will remove it only if it is the
nest of wasps…

Figure 2: Examples of queries collected via crowdsourcing.
Relevance(Q, A) is 1 and Relevance(Q, Ā) is 0, where Relevance(Q, A)
stands for the relevance between Q and A.
At the search stage, we compute Relevance(q, Ai ) (i = 1, · · · , M)
for the user’s query q and every QA pair in the target Tt . QA pairs
in a higher rank are used as search results.

Q: How to obtain tax cer<ﬁcate by A: To receive cer<ﬁcates by mail, …
mail?
…

…

2.4

Local government FAQ sets

Figure 1: An overview of our proposed method.

In order to realize robust and flexible matching, we combine the
q-Q similarity by TSUBAKI and the q-A relevance by BERT.
When TSUBAKI’s similarity score is high, this is probably a
positive case because the words in q and Q highly overlap with
each other. However, it is difficult to cope with the lexical gaps
between q and Q. On the other hand, since BERT validates the
relevance between q and A, it can retrieve an appropriate QA pair
even if there is a lexical gap between q and Q. To make use of
these characteristics, we combine two methods as follows. First,
we take the ten-highest results of BERT’s output. For QA pairs
whose TSUBAKI score gets a higher score than α, we rank them in
order of TSUBAKI’s score. For the others, we rank them in order
of the score of Similarity(q, Q) × t + Relevance(q, A) where t is a
hyper-parameter.
TSUBAKI’s score tends to be higher when the given query is
longer. Hence, before taking the sum, we normalize TSUBAKI’s
score by using the numbers of content words and dependency
relations in the query. We divide the original score by the following
value.1
Count(ContentWords) × k 1 + Count(DependencyRelations) × k 2

retrieval tasks. We evaluate our model on these datasets and show
that the proposed method works effectively in FAQ retrieval.

2 PROPOSED METHOD
2.1 Task Description
We begin by formally defining the task of FAQ retrieval. Here, we
focus on local government FAQ as an example. Suppose that the
number of local government FAQ sets is N . Our target FAQ set, Tt ,
is one of them. When the number of QA entries in Tt is M, Tt is a
collection of QA pairs {(Q 1 , A1 ), (Q 2 , A2 ), ..., (Q M , AM )}. The task
is then to find the appropriate QA pair (Q i , Ai ) from Tt based on a
user’s query q. We use T1 ,T2 , ...,TN as our training data, including
the FAQ set Tt of the target local government.

2.2

q-Q similarity by TSUBAKI

We use TSUBAKI [7] to compute q-Q similarity. TSUBAKI is an
unsupervised retrieval engine based on OKAPI BM25 [5]. TSUBAKI
accounts for a dependency structure of a sentence, not just its
words, to provide accurate retrieval. For flexible matching, it also
uses synonyms automatically extracted from dictionaries and Web
corpus. Here we regard Q in each QA as a document and compute
Similarity(q, Q) for the q-Q similarity.

2.3

Combining TSUBAKI and BERT

3

EXPERIMENTS AND EVALUATION

We conducted our experiments on two datasets, localgovFAQ and
StackExchange. We constructed localgovFAQ dataset, as explained
in Sec 3.1. StackExchange dataset is constructed in the paper [2] by
extracting QA pairs from the web apps domain of StackExchange
and consists of 719 QA pairs. Each Q has paraphrase queries, and
the total number of queries is 1,250. All the models were evaluated
using five-fold cross validation. In each validation, all the queries
were split into training (60%), development (20%) and test (20%).
The task is to estimate an appropriate QA pair for each query q
among 719 QA pairs.

q-A relevance by BERT

We use BERT to compute q-A relevance. BERT is based on the
Transformer [9] that effectively encodes an input text. It is designed
to be pre-trained using a language model objective on a large raw
corpus and fine-tuned for each specific task including sentence
classification, sentence-pair classification, and question answering.
As it is pre-trained on a large corpus, BERT achieves high accuracy
even if the data size of the specific task is not large enough. We
apply BERT to a sentence-pair classifier for questions and answers.
By applying the Transformer to the input question and answer, it
captures the relevance between the pair.
The training data we use is the collection of QA pairs from
FAQ sets (see Sec. 2.1). For each positive example (Q, A), we randomly select Ā and produce negative training data (Q, Ā). On this
data, we train BERT to solve the two-class classification problem:

3.1

LocalgovFAQ Evaluation Set Construction

Amagasaki-city, a relatively large city in Japan, was chosen as a
target government, whose Web site has 1,786 QA pairs. First, queries
to this government were collected using a crowdsourcing. Example
queries are shown in Figure 2. We collected 990 queries in total.
1

1114

We do not normalize the BERT’s score because it takes a value between 0 to 1.

Short Research Papers 2C: Search

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

TSUBAKI and BERT output at most five relevant QA pairs for
each query, and each QA pair was manually evaluated assigning
one of the following four categories:

Model
MAP MRR P@5 SR@1 SR@5 NDCG
TSUBAKI
0.558 0.598 0.297 0.504 0.734 0.501
Bi-LSTM
0.451 0.498 0.248 0.379 0.601 0.496
BERTtargetOnly 0.559 0.610 0.285 0.504 0.751 0.526
BERT
0.576 0.631 0.333 0.509 0.810 0.560
q-QA Proposed
0.647 0.705 0.357 0.612 0.841 0.621
Table 1: Evaluation result on the localgovFAQ dataset.
q-Q
q-A

A Contain correct information.
B Contain relevant information.
C The topic is same as a query, but do not contain relevant
information.
D Contain only irrelevant information.

Model
MAP MRR P@5
CNN-rank
0.79 0.77 0.63
TSUBAKI
0.698 0.669 0.638
q-A
BERT (w/o query paraphrases) 0.631 0.805 0.546
BERT
0.887 0.936 0.770
q-QA CNN-rank
0.74 0.84 0.62
Proposed
0.897 0.942 0.776
Table 2: Evaluation result on the StackExchange dataset.

In general, information retrieval evaluation based on the pooling
method has inherently a biased problem. To alleviate this problem,
when there are no relevant QA pairs among the outputs by TSUBAKI and BERT, a correct QA pair was searched by using appropriate
different keywords. If there are no relevant QA pair found, this
query was excluded from our evaluation set. The resultant queries
were 784. Since 20% of queries were used for the development set,
627 queries were used for our evaluation.

3.2

q-Q

Experimental Settings

2.4, k 1 and k 2 were set to 4 and 2, respectively, and α and t were
set to 0.3 and 10 respectively using the development set.

For the localgovFAQ dataset, MAP (Mean Average Precision), MRR
(Mean Reciprocal Rank), P@5 (Precision at 5), SR@k (Success Rate)2
and nDCG (normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain) were used as
our evaluation measures. The categories A, B and C were regarded
as correct for MAP, MRR, P@5 and SR@k, and the evaluation level
of categories A, B and C was regarded as 3, 2 and 1 for nDCG,
respectively. For the StackExchange dataset, MAP, MRR and P@5
were used, following Karan et al. [2] .
For Japanese, the pre-training of BERT was performed using
Japanese Wikipedia, which consists of approximately 18M sentences, and the fine-tuning was performed using FAQs of 21 Japanese local governments, which consists of approximately 20K QA
pairs. The morphological analyzer Juman++3 was applied to input
texts for word segmentation, and words were broken into subwords by applying BPE [6]. For English BERT pre-trained model, a
publicly-available model was used4 . For the fine-tuning for StackExchange dataset, the training set (q, Q, A) was divided into (q, A)
and (Q, A).
In the localgovFAQ dataset, Bi-LSTM with attention [8] was
adopted as our baseline. We also used model BERTtargetOnly , which
is fine-tuned only with the target FAQ set, in order to test the
effect of using other FAQ sets. In the StackExchange dataset, CNNrank in q-Q and q-QA settings, which is the neural FAQ retrieval
model based on a convolutional neural network, was used, whose
scores were from Karan et al. [2]. Furthermore, BERT (w/o query
paraphrases) was adopted, where (q, A) pairs were not used for
BERT training, to see the performance when no manually-assigned
query paraphrases were available. For both datasets, TSUBAKI was
applied only in q-Q setting5 .
For both BERT and Bi-LSTM models, 24 negative samples for
one positive sample were used. For the coefficients explained in Sec.

3.3

Evaluation Results and Discussions

Table 1 shows an experimental result on localgovFAQ dataset. In
q-A setting, BERT was better than the Bi-LSTM baseline, which
indicates BERT was useful for this task. Although the performances
of TSUBAKI and BERT were almost the same in terms of SR@1,
the performance of BERT was better than TSUBAKI in terms of
SR@5, which indicates BERT could retrieve a variety of QA pairs.
The proposed method performed the best. This demonstrated the
effectiveness of our proposed method. The score of BERT was better
than one of BERTtargetOnly , which indidates that using other FAQ
sets is effective.
Table 2 shows an experimental result on StackExchange dataset.
In the same way as the result on localgovFAQ, BERT performed
well, and the proposed method performed the best in terms of all
the measures. The performance of BERT was better than one of
"BERT (w/o query paraphrases)", which indicates that the use of
various augmented questions was effective.
Figure 3 shows the performance of TSUBAKI and BERT on localgovFAQ according to their TOP1 scores. From this figure, we can
find that in the retrieved QA pair whose TSUBAKI score is high,
its accuracy is very high. On the otherhand, there is a relatively
loose correlation between the accuracy and BERT score. This indicates TSUBAKI and BERT have different characteristics, and our
proposed combining method is reasonable.
Table 3 shows the examples, translated from Japanese, of system
outputs and correct QA pairs on localgovFAQ. In the first example,
although TSUBAKI retrieved the wrong QA pair since there is a
word "consultation" and "counseling" in the query and Q, BERT
and the proposed method could retrieve a correct QA pair. In the
second example, the proposed method could retrieve a correct QA
pair on the first rank although the first rank of TSUBAKI and BERT
was wrong.
In the third example, no methods could retrieve a correct QA
pair. Although BERT could capture the relevance between a word
"instruments" in the query and "music" in A, the retrieved QA pair
was wrong. The correct QA pair consists of Q saying "Information

2 Success

Rate is the fraction of questions for which at least one related question is
ranked among the top k .
3 http://nlp.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp/EN/index.php?JUMAN++
4 https://storage.googleapis.com/bert_models/2018_10_18/uncased_L-12_H-768_
A-12.zip
5 We omit the TSUBAKI’s results in the q-A setting and the q-QA setting as we got the
worse scores than the q-Q setting.

1115

Short Research Papers 2C: Search

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

Query
TSUBAKI
BERT
Is there a consultation 1 Q: I’d like to have a career counsel- 1 Q: I’d like to consult a lawyer for
desk for workplace ha- × ing.
✓ work-related problems.
rassment?
A: Consultation place: AmagasakiA: On specialized and sophisticated
city, ...
labor issues such as wages, dismissal, occupational accidents, ...
Where should I renew 1 Q: Where should I apply for med- 1 Q: To update a bus ticket, do I have
my license?
× ical staff licenses (new, corrected / × to go myself?
rewritten, re-issued)?
A: In principle, please apply for the
A: License application for doctors,
application by yourself. ...
dentists, public health nurses ...
2 Q: Please tell me about the proce- 2 Q: Can I file an agent application to
✓ dure of updating your driver’s li- × renew my bus ticket?
cense.
A: As a general rule, please apply
A: Regarding the renewal procedure
for yourself. ...
of your driver’s license ...
Is there a place that we 1 Q: Where is the location of the 1 Q: Please tell me about Amagasaki
can use for practicing × polling place before the election’s × City boys music corps.
instruments?
due date?
A: "Amagasaki City Boys Music
A: There are three polling stations
Club" includes a choir corps, a brass
before the date in the city. ...
band, ...

Proposed method
1 Q: Can we get a lawyer’s labor coun✓ selor?
A: On specialized and sophisticated
labor issues such as wages, dismissal, occupational accidents, ...
1 Q: Please tell me about the proce✓ dure of updating your driver’s license.
A: Regarding the renewal procedure
of your driver’s license ...
2 Q: Can I file an agent application to
× renew my bus ticket?
A: As a general rule, please apply
for yourself. ...
1 Q: Please tell me about Amagasaki
× City boys music corps.
A: "Amagasaki City Boys Music
Club" includes a choir corps, a brass
band, ...

The number of correct or incorrect TOP1

Table 3: Examples of system outputs and their manual evaluations. (✓and × in the table mean correct and incorrect, respectively, where the evaluation categories A, B, and C are regarded as correct.)
450
400

TSUBAKI Correct
Incorrect

experimental results demonstrated that our combined use of queryquestion similarity and query-answer relevance was effective. We
are planning to make the code and constructed dataset localgovFAQ
publicly available6 .

BERT Correct
Incorrect

350
300

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

250
200

This work was partly supported by JST CREST Grant Number
JPMJCR1301, Japan.

150

REFERENCES

100

[1] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2018. BERT:
Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding.
CoRR abs/1810.04805 (2018). arXiv:1810.04805
[2] Mladen Karan and Jan Snajder. 2018. Paraphrase-focused learning to rank for
domain-specific frequently asked questions retrieval. Expert Systems with Applications 91 (2018), 418–433.
[3] Irina Matveeva, Chris Burges, Timo Burkard, Andy Laucius, and Leon Wong.
2006. High Accuracy Retrieval with Multiple Nested Ranker. In SIGIR. ACM,
437–444.
[4] Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. 2016.
SQuAD: 100,000+ Questions for Machine Comprehension of Text. In EMNLP.
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2383–2392.
[5] Stephen E. Robertson, Steve Walker, Micheline Hancock-Beaulieu, Aarron Gull,
and Marianna Lau. 1992. Okapi at TREC. In TREC. 21–30.
[6] Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch. 2016. Neural Machine Translation of Rare Words with Subword Units. In ACL. Association for Computational
Linguistics, 1715–1725.
[7] Keiji Shinzato, Tomohide Shibata, Daisuke Kawahara, Chikara Hashimoto, and
Sadao Kurohashi. 2008. TSUBAKI: An Open Search Engine Infrastructure for
Developing New Information Access Methodology. In IJCNLP. 189–196.
[8] Ming Tan, Bing Xiang, and Bowen Zhou. 2015. LSTM-based Deep Learning Models for Non-factoid Answer Selection. CoRR abs/1511.04108 (2015).
arXiv:1511.04108
[9] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones,
Aidan N Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is All
you Need. In NIPS. 5998–6008.
[10] Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel
Bowman. 2018. GLUE: A Multi-Task Benchmark and Analysis Platform for Natural Language Understanding. In EMNLP2018 Workshop BlackboxNLP. Association
for Computational Linguistics, 353–355.
[11] Yu Wu, Wei Wu, Zhoujun Li, and Ming Zhou. 2018. Learning Matching Models
with Weak Supervision for Response Selection in Retrieval-based Chatbots. In
ACL. 420–425.

50
0

(0.0,0.2) [0.2,0.4) [0.4,0.6) [0.6,0.8) [0.8,1.0)
Score

Figure 3: The number of queries to which the systems can or
cannot output correct QA pair as TOP1 with respect to their
scores.
on the facility of the youth center, hours of use, and closed day"
and A mentioning a music room as one of the available facilities
in the youth center. To retrieve this correct QA pair, the deeper
understanding of QA texts is necessary.
It takes about 2 seconds to retrieve QA pairs per query on localgovFAQ dataset by using 7 GPUs (TITAN X Pascal), and our model
is practical enough. For a larger FAQ set, one can use our method
in a telescoping setting [3].

4

CONCLUSION

This paper presented a method for using query-question similarity
and BERT-based query-answer relevance in a FAQ retrieval task.
By collecting other similar FAQ sets, we could increase the size of
available QA data. BERT, which has been recently proposed, was
applied to capture the relevance between queries and answers. This
method realized the robust and high-performance retrieval. The

6 http://nlp.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp/EN/index.php?BERT-Based_FAQ_Retrieval

1116

