Workshop

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

WCIS 2019: 1st Workshop on Conversational Interaction Systems
Abhinav Rastogi

Alexandros Papangelis

Google Research
abhirast@google.com

Uber AI
alexandros.papangelis@uclmail.net

Rahul Goel

Chandra Khatri

Amazon Alexa AI
goerahul@amazon.com

Uber AI
chandrak@uber.com
challenges such as Dialogue System Technology Challenges [4–
8, 17, 18] and Amazon Alexa Prize [12] have continued to inspire
research in conversational AI bringing together researchers from
different communities such as speech recognition, spoken language
understanding, reinforcement learning, information retrieval, language generation, and multi-modal question answering.
This workshop aims to bring together researchers from academia
and industry to discuss the challenges and future of conversational
agents and interactive systems. We will highlight applications like
recommendation systems [1, 16], search [3], knowledge graph induction [11], scalable dialogue state tracking [2, 13], multi-modal
interaction [10], language generation [9, 15], and web question answering [14]. The workshop will include talks from senior technical
leaders and researchers to share insights associated with building
conversational systems at scale. As an outcome we expect the participants from the SIGIR community to walk away with a better
understanding of modern conversational interfaces as well as key
areas of research in this field.

ABSTRACT
The first workshop on Conversational Interaction Systems is held
in Paris, France on July 25th, 2019, co-located with the ACM Special
Interest Group on Information Retrieval (SIGIR). The goal of the
workshop is to bring together researchers from academia and industry to discuss the challenges and future of conversational agents
and interactive systems. The workshop has an exciting program
that spans a number of subareas including: multi-modal conversational interfaces, dialogue accessibility, and scaling such systems.
The program includes eight invited talks, a lively panel discussion
on emerging topics, and presentation of original research papers.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Computing methodologies → Natural language processing; Discourse, dialogue and pragmatics; Natural language
generation.

KEYWORDS
dialogue systems; multi-turn interactions; conversational interfaces;
state tracking; multi-modal interfaces; question answering; neural
networks; information retrieval systems

2

ACM Reference Format:
Abhinav Rastogi, Alexandros Papangelis, Rahul Goel, and Chandra Khatri.
2019. WCIS 2019: 1st Workshop on Conversational Interaction Systems.
In Proceedings of the 42nd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research
and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’19), July 21–25, 2019, Paris,
France. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 3 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.
3331648

1

SCOPE OF THE WORKSHOP

Conversation AI and information retrieval are highly interrelated
fields. Both have been instrumental in development of large scale
commercial personal assistants. For building scalable user facing
conversational systems, information retrieval is necessary. For addressing more complicated retrieval tasks, knowledge grounding
and multi-turn interactions are showing promising results. In this
workshop, we aim to address a wide variety of challenges recommended but not limited to the following areas:
• End to end approaches for multi-turn dialog and retrieval
systems
• Reinforcement and imitation learning for dialog and retrieval
systems
• Dialog systems:
– Dialog management and state tracking
– Language generation and dialog evaluation
• Conversational approaches to information retrieval:
– Multi-turn interactions for addressing complex queries
– Conversational recommendation systems and personalization
– Surfacing and realization of search results
• Visual dialog and question answering
• Human-human, human-machine and multi-modal interactions
• Usability, interpretability and explainability of conversational AI and IR models

INTRODUCTION

Conversational interaction systems such as Amazon Alexa, Google
Assistant, Apple Siri, and Microsoft Cortana have become very
popular over the recent years. Such systems provide a conversational interface to a wide variety of content and on the web and
in turn for IR systems. Some interactive systems like Facebook
Portal, Echo Show and Google Nest Hub also involve challenges
with language understanding in combination with vision. Research
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6172-9/19/07.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331648

1435

Workshop

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

3.5

3

WORKSHOP ORGANIZATION AND
PROGRAM
3.1 Organizers
Abhinav Rastogi is a dialogue systems researcher at Google Research. His research interests include natural language understanding, language generation and multimodal dialogue. Previously, he
was at Stanford University, where he worked with Prof. Andrew
Ng on video understanding and Prof. Christopher Manning on
natural language inference. Abhinav holds degrees in Electrical
Engineering from Stanford University and IIT Bombay.
Rahul Goel is a machine learning scientist at Alexa AI where
he works on improving spoken language understanding and dialog systems. Many of his contributions are currently deployed
in Alexa. His research interests include dialog systems, language
understanding, deep learning, and social computing. Before joining
Amazon he was at Georgia Tech working with Dr. Jacob Eisenstein
on computational social science.
Alexandros Papangelis is currently with Uber AI, on the Conversational AI team; his interests include statistical dialogue management, natural language processing, and human-machine social
interactions. Prior to Uber, he was with Toshiba Research Europe,
leading the Cambridge Research Lab team on statistical spoken dialogue. Before joining Toshiba, he was a postdoctoral fellow at CMU
designing and developing the next generation of socially-skilled
virtual agents. He received his PhD from the University of Texas at
Arlington, MSc from University College London, and BSc from the
University of Athens.
Chandra Khatri is a researcher interested in Conversational AI
efforts at Uber. Currently, he is interested in making conversational
systems smarter and scalable while addressing the fundamental
challenges in language understanding. Prior to Uber, he was the
lead scientist at Alexa Prize and was driving the science for the
Alexa Prize competition. Before that, he was a research scientist at
eBay.

3.2

4

REFERENCES
[1] Konstantina Christakopoulou, Filip Radlinski, and Katja Hofmann. 2016. Towards
conversational recommender systems. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD
international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining. ACM, 815–824.
[2] Rahul Goel, Shachi Paul, Tagyoung Chung, Jeremie Lecomte, Arindam Mandal,
and Dilek Hakkani-Tur. 2018. Flexible and Scalable State Tracking Framework
for Goal-Oriented Dialogue Systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.12891 (2018).
[3] Larry Heck, Dilek Hakkani-Tür, Madhu Chinthakunta, Gokhan Tur, Rukmini
Iyer, Partha Parthasarathy, Lisa Stifelman, Elizabeth Shriberg, and Ashley Fidler.
2013. Multi-modal conversational search and browse. In First Workshop on Speech,
Language and Audio in Multimedia.
[4] M. Henderson, B. Thomson, and J. Williams. 2014. The second dialog state tracking challenge. In 15th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Discourse
and Dialogue, Vol. 263.
[5] M. Henderson, B. Thomson, and J. Williams. 2014. The third dialog state tracking
challenge. In Spoken Language Technology Workshop (SLT), 2014 IEEE. IEEE, 324–
329.
[6] Chiori Hori, Julien Perez, Ryuichiro Higashinaka, Takaaki Hori, Y-Lan Boureau,
Michimasa Inaba, Yuiko Tsunomori, Tetsuro Takahashi, Koichiro Yoshino, and
Seokhwan Kim. 2019. Overview of the sixth dialog system technology challenge:
Dstc6. Computer Speech & Language 55 (2019), 1–25.
[7] Seokhwan Kim, Luis Fernando D’Haro, Rafael E. Banchs, Jason Williams, and
Matthew Henderson. 2016. The Fourth Dialog State Tracking Challenge. In Proceedings of the 7th International Workshop on Spoken Dialogue Systems (IWSDS).
[8] Seokhwan Kim, Luis Fernando D’Haro, Rafael E. Banchs, Jason Williams, Matthew
Henderson, and Koichiro Yoshino. 2016. The Fifth Dialog State Tracking Challenge. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE Workshop on Spoken Language Technology
(SLT).
[9] Jiwei Li, Will Monroe, Alan Ritter, Dan Jurafsky, Michel Galley, and Jianfeng Gao.
2016. Deep Reinforcement Learning for Dialogue Generation. In Proceedings
of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
1192–1202.
[10] Vishal Ishwar Naik, Angeliki Metallinou, and Rahul Goel. 2018. Context aware
conversational understanding for intelligent agents with a screen. In ThirtySecond AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
[11] Roberto Navigli and Simone Paolo Ponzetto. 2012. BabelNet: The automatic construction, evaluation and application of a wide-coverage multilingual semantic
network. Artificial Intelligence 193 (2012), 217–250.
[12] Ashwin Ram, Rohit Prasad, Chandra Khatri, Anu Venkatesh, Raefer Gabriel,
Qing Liu, Jeff Nunn, Behnam Hedayatnia, Ming Cheng, Ashish Nagar, et al.
2018. Conversational ai: The science behind the alexa prize. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1801.03604 (2018).
[13] Abhinav Rastogi, Dilek Hakkani-Tür, and Larry Heck. 2017. Scalable multidomain dialogue state tracking. In 2017 IEEE Automatic Speech Recognition and
Understanding Workshop (ASRU). IEEE, 561–568.

Contributed Paper and Reviews

Program Committee

Alessandra Cervone (University of Trento), Angeliki Metanillou
(Alexa AI), Behnam Hedayatnia, Amazon (Alexa AI), Sanghyun
Yi (Caltech), Semih Yavuz (University of California, Santa Barbara), Huaixiu Zheng (Uber AI), Marco Damonte (University of
Edinburgh), Tagyoung Chung (Alexa AI), Raghav Gupta (Google
Research), Tanmay Rajpurohit (Genpact AI), Dian Yu (UC Davis)

3.4

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We would like to thank the authors who submitted their research
to the conference, and also the program committee members who
contributed to putting together the exciting program. We would
also like to thank the invited speakers, and the organizers of the
SIGIR conference.

We have received eight submissions. Each paper will receive reviews
from at least two members of the program committee. Accepted
papers will be presented at the workshop through invited talks
and posters, and be hosted on the workshop website: https://sites.
google.com/view/wcis.

3.3

Invited Speakers
• Yun-Nung (Vivian) Chen, Assistant Professor, Dept. of Computer Science and Information Engineering National Taiwan
University
• Anton Leuski, Research Assistant Professor, USC Viterbi
School of Engineering Computer Science Department
• Laurianne Sitbon, Senior Lecturer, QUT University
• Pranav Khaitan, Senior Engineering Manager, Google Research
• Milica Gasic, Professor, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf
• Jan Sedivy, Technology Transfer Manager, Czech Technical
University
• Camilo Ortiz, Researcher, Bloomberg LP

Advisory Committee

Dilek Hakkani-Tur (Alexa AI), Rushin Shah (Facebook AI), Gokhan
Tur (Uber AI), Zhou Yu (UC Davis), Arindam Mandal (Alexa AI), Jan
Sedivy (Czech Technical University), Panagiotis Papadakos (ForthICS), Raefer Gabriel (Alexa AI)

1436

Workshop

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

=
[16] Cynthia A Thompson, Mehmet H Goker, and Pat Langley. 2004. A personalized
system for conversational recommendations. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
Research 21 (2004), 393–428.
[17] J. Williams, A. Raux, D. Ramachandran, and A. Black. 2013. The dialog state
tracking challenge. In Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2013 Conference. 404–413.
[18] Koichiro Yoshino, Chiori Hori, Julien Perez, Luis Fernando DâĂŹHaro, Lazaros
Polymenakos, Chulaka Gunasekara, Walter S Lasecki, Jonathan K Kummerfeld,
Michel Galley, Chris Brockett, et al. 2019. Dialog System Technology Challenge
7. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.03461 (2019).

[14] Deepak Ravichandran and Eduard Hovy. 2002. Learning surface text patterns for
a question answering system. In Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting on association for computational linguistics. Association for Computational Linguistics,
41–47.
[15] Alessandro Sordoni, Michel Galley, Michael Auli, Chris Brockett, Yangfeng Ji,
Margaret Mitchell, Jian-Yun Nie, Jianfeng Gao, and Bill Dolan. 2015. A neural
network approach to context-sensitive generation of conversational responses.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.06714 (2015).

1437

