Keynote & Invited Talk

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

The Importance of Interaction for Information Retrieval
W. Bruce Croft
University of Massachusetts Amherst and RMIT University
croft@cs.umass.edu

ABSTRACT

conversational search. These areas have recently become
popular in the NLP community but they have deep roots in
IR. I will describe the specific lines of research we have
followed at the Center for Intelligent Information Retrieval
and RMIT, including interactive answer passage retrieval,
studies of information-seeking dialogues, and neural
models for selecting responses and answers. Although there
are many aspects to this research, I will highlight the parts
where interaction is important, how we have attempted to
evaluate the research, and where significant progress needs
to be made.

There has historically been a divide between the useroriented and system-oriented research communities in
information retrieval. In my opinion, this divide is based
primarily on a difference in viewpoint about the relative
importance of understanding how people search for
information compared to developing new retrieval models
and ranking algorithms. There is strong agreement,
however, that the interaction between the user and the
search engine is a fundamental part of the IR process. The
IR field was one of the first in computer science to
recognize the importance of the user-system interaction,
which led to a number of core concepts such as relevance,
ranking, result presentation, feedback, evaluation, and
browsing. Continuing the discussion of interaction in the
past two Salton Award lectures from Jarvelin and Belkin,
the key message of this talk is that effective information
access requires interaction between the user and the system,
where both play a role. Additionally, there is growing
evidence that even more effective information access can be
achieved by a system that actively supports interaction,
particularly in the limited-bandwidth environments
provided by mobile devices and voice-based assistants.

CCS Concepts/ACM Classifiers
Information systems – Information Retrieval.

Author Keywords
information retrieval; user interaction; conversational search;
interactive answer retrieval.

BIOGRAPHY
W. Bruce Croft is a Distinguished Professor Emeritus at
the University of Massachusetts Amherst, Director of the
Center for Intelligent Information Retrieval (CIIR), and
Senior Research Fellow at RMIT University, Melbourne.
He is an ACM Fellow and has
received four lifetime achievement
awards for his research, including
the Gerard Salton Award from ACM
SIGIR. Five of his papers have
received SIGIR Test of Time Awards
and
another
three
received
honorable mentions. His Google hindex is currently 103.

In this talk, I will first give an overview of past IR research
on user-system interaction. In much of this research, the
system provides passive support for the retrieval process
and much of the burden for effective retrieval stays with the
user. There has been some research, however, that has
attempted to actively support the interaction by designing
expert intermediary systems. After this review, I will focus
on two current areas of research where active support for
interaction is crucial. These are question answering and

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this
work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.
SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France.
© 2019 Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6172-9/19/07.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331185

1

