Demonstration Papers 3: Applications

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

KANDINSKY: Abstract Art-Inspired Visualization of Social
Discussions
Christina Lui

Sourav S Bhowmick

Adam Jatowt

Nanyang Technological University
Singapore
lu0003na@ntu.edu.sg

Nanyang Technological University
Singapore
assourav@ntu.edu.sg

Kyoto University
Japan
adam@dl.kuis.kyoto-u.ac.jp

ABSTRACT
Many social media sites allow users to upload text, images, and
videos (collectively referred to as anchor post) for public consumption. These posts may attract hundreds of comments from many
social users leading to social conversations (i.e., discussions). Tools
that can facilitate user-friendly and effective understanding and
analysis of large volumes of comments associated with anchor
posts can be of great benefit to individuals and organizations. In
this demonstration, we present a novel end-to-end visualization
system called Kandinsky to support multi-faceted visualization
of social discussions associated with an anchor post. In Kandinsky, the social discussion landscape is visualized using a collection
of colorful circles and concentric circles, which are inspired from
the famous abstract arts called “Squares with Concentric Circles”
and “Several Circles” by Russian painter Wassily Kandinsky (18661944). Intuitively, a circle and a concentric circle represent a social
comment and a collection of comments in a discussion thread, respectively. We discuss various innovative features of Kandinsky
and demonstrate its effectiveness.

Figure 1: Squares with Concentric Circles (1913) and Several
Circles (1926) by W. Kandinsky [1, 2].
agencies can gain greater insights on issues related to their policies
from key discussions associated with their anchor posts.
Unfortunately, majority of the social media sites provide primitive support for such tools. For example, YouTube allows one to
sort discussions related to an anchor post by “top comments” or
“newest first”. These tools do not allow us to visualize a bird’s-eye
view of the conversation landscape, highlighting discussion threads
that have garnered considerable attention and interactions between
various comments and users. Furthermore, they do not allow visualization of evolution of discussions over time, keyword search on
the discussion threads, or visualizing comments that are topically
similar in content to a comment-of-interest. Clearly, an easy-to-use,
effective visualization system that can support these features will
enable us to better comprehend the social conversation landscape
associated with an anchor post.
At first glance, it may seem that we can visualize a social conversation using a network [6] where nodes represent comments and
edges represent interactions between them (e.g., replies, mentions,
retweets). Although such network view is reasonable to visualize
social conversation, it becomes cognitively challenging to an end
user when the network size becomes large [5]. Hence, traditional
network view becomes a stumbling block for comprehending interactions in a large social conversation involving many comments.
In this demonstration, we depart from the traditional network
view by presenting a novel end-to-end social conversation visualization system called Kandinsky that is inspired by abstract art.
Specifically, our visualization scheme is based on a collection of
colorful circles and concentric circles, which are based on the famous
abstract arts entitled “Squares with Concentric Circles” and “Several Circles” (Figure 1) by Russian painter and art theorist Wassily
Kandinsky (1866-1944). In Kandinsky, the social conversation landscape with respect to an anchor post is represented as a collection
of circles and concentric circles. Specifically, each social comment is
represented by a colored circle. Replies to a comment are visualized

ACM Reference Format:
Christina Lui, Sourav S Bhowmick, and Adam Jatowt. 2019. KANDINSKY:
Abstract Art-Inspired Visualization of Social Discussions. In Proceedings of
the 42nd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development
in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’19), July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 4 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331411

1

INTRODUCTION

Social media sites (e.g., Facebook, YouTube) allow an individual or
an organization to upload post, images, or videos (we referred to
it collectively as anchor post) for public consumption (e.g., https:
//www.youtube.com/watch?v=A838gS8nwas). Such anchor post
may attract hundreds of comments from many commentators (i.e.,
users) leading to social conversations (i.e., discussions) among them.
Since it is time-consuming and cumbersome to comprehend a large
number of comments in a social discussion by simply browsing
them, tools that can facilitate user-friendly and effective comprehension and analysis of these discussions can be of great benefit
to individuals and organizations alike. For instance, government
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France
© 2019 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6172-9/19/07. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331411

1345

Demonstration Papers 3: Applications

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

Figure 2: Architecture of Kandinsky.
as concentric circles with the original comment (i.e., comment which
directly responds to an anchor post) being the innermost circle. The
colors are used as identifiers of the commentators. Hence, more
users are involved in a discussion, the larger and more colorful the
concentric circles are. To the best of our knowledge, Kandinsky is
the first system that takes such a concentric-circles paradigm for
visualizing online social conversations.

2

Figure 3: gui of Kandinsky.

SYSTEM OVERVIEW

Figure 2 shows the architecture of Kandinsky, which mainly consists of the following modules.
The Discussion Acquisitor module. Given a social post/video
(referred to as an anchor post in the sequel) selected by a user, this
module retrieves all comments associated with the post via the
social media data api. Specifically, this includes the textual content
of a comment, the author information (identifier and name), the
date/time of comment, number of likes it has garnered, and the
reply id in which the comment is replied to.
The Kandinsky gui module. Figure 3 depicts the gui of Kandinsky. It consists of four main panels. Panel 1 visualizes the discussions associated with an anchor post as a collection of colorful
circles and concentric circles on a black background. We refer to
this panel as the Kandinsky Canvas. Such colorful objects on a contrasting background may potentially summon visual attention of
end users [9]. Panel 2 shows the timeline component of the gui. It
is visualized as a slider and is the starting point where users can
kick off exploration of the social conversation landscape. The span
of the timeline is defined as the time when the first comment was
posted to the time of the last comment prior to the retrieval of the
comments. The main function of the timeline is to enable users to
visualize conversation at a specific time period. Specifically, one
can drag on the track of the slider to a desired time for viewing
the conversation that occurred during that time period. She can
also click on the player icon to auto play the evolution of the social conversation over time. Timeline markers (markers for brevity)
are introduced on the timeline to indicate significant conversation
patterns, which are shown as ticks in different colors. When a user
drags the slider to a marker, she can visualize interesting changes
to the conversation at that timepoint. These markers are generated
by the Timeline Markers Generator module.
Panel 3 displays the comments in a selected discussion thread.
It is invoked on demand when a user selects a circle/concentric
circle in the Kandinsky Canvas. This panel can also be used to
view similar comments to a user-selected comment by invoking
the Similar Comments Finder module. Lastly, Panel 4 allows a user

1346

Figure 4: (a) A conversation network (left). (b) Concentric
circles (right).
to perform keyword search on the comments associated with an
anchor post by invoking the Keyword Search module.
The Discussion Processor module. The goal of this module
is to represent the structural and temporal information associated
with discussions to aid effective visualization. Specifically, it aims
to extract (a) the chronology of social comments that captures the
temporal information of conversations and (b) the connectivity
between the comments. The former can be obtained from either
the social media platform apis (e.g., Facebook, YouTube) or sorting
the retrieved raw data (e.g., Twitter). Each comment is annotated
with the number of likes (if any) it has garnered and user name/id.
Online discussions typically adopt a hierarchical structure with
the original comment as the root. We refer to it as conversation network. Since such hierarchy may result in a large number of levels,
several social media platforms constrain the height of the hierarchy using name tagging or hashtag. For instance, each reply to a
comment may be referred by the tagged name at the beginning of
the reply. Hence, the original structure of the hierarchy is restored
in Kandinsky by connecting the parent node and its children identified by name tagging. This module assumes that a reply by profile
tagging is only within a thread, i.e., inter-thread profile reference
(i.e., mention) is not considered as reply. Mentions are separately
processed to form connections between relevant comments in the
network. Figure 4(a) is an example of a conversation network rooted
at Comment 1 (i.e., original comment) where ids to comments are
assigned according to their creation time and different color codes
are assigned to different users.
The Similar Comments Finder module. The goal of this module is to find comments that are topically similar to a given comment

Demonstration Papers 3: Applications

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

in the conversation landscape. To this end, it adopts the Bags-ofWords model to represent each comment. Since social comments
can be noisy, they are first cleaned and processed to extract key
phrases in the content. Specifically, hyperlinks, repetitive letters,
and non-ASCII characters (e.g., emojis, non-English characters),
profanities, and internet slangs are removed. English enclitic (i.e.,
abbreviated forms) are converted to their full form and noun phrase
chunking is performed for keyword/keyphrase extraction. Then,
topics associated with each comment are modelled using LDA with
Gibbs Sampling method1 . The number of topics K is set to 10 as it
gives a good balance between processing time and log likelihood
value. The hyperparameters α and β are set to 0.1 and 0.01, respectively, as they give good distribution of words to describe a topic in
reasonable time. Hence, after this step, each comment is associated
with a topic distribution.
Given a user-selected comment c, this module computes the
cosine similarity between the topic distributions of c and the comments in the Comment Repository and selects those with similarity
score greater than the similarity threshold δ (δ = 0.5 as default).
The Keyword Search module. This module implements keywordbased search on comments associated with an anchor post by utilizing inverted index.
The Timeline Markers module. The goal of the Timeline Markers Generator module is to generate the timeline markers automatically from the underlying conversation data. Timeline markers are
indicators shown on the timeline (Panel 2 in Figure 3) to mark the
time when some interesting pattern w.r.t the social conversation is
detected (e.g., a surge of comments). These markers are generated
by first transforming the user interaction data into feature vectors
by partitioning the timestamps with a time window W and then
clustering them with k-means clustering using Lloyd’s method [7].
The Kandinsky Canvas Generator module. The Kandinsky
Canvas is generated to visualize various aspects of a social conversation landscape. Each comment is represented by a colored circle.
The radius of a circle is influenced by normalized value of the like
count of the comment, which is a measure of its popularity. Color
codes are generated randomly such that comments posted by the
same author share the same color. Each comment is also tagged
with a unique id that is assigned to each author’s name. Hence, if
an anchor post only contains original comments with no replies to
them then the Kandinsky Canvas will contain a collection of circles
with varying color and size.
In reality, an original comment may garner responses from different social users resulting in a conversation network with the
original comment as the root. In Kandinsky, replies to a comment
are visualized as concentric circles. The more colors a concentric
circles contain, the more social users participated in the discussion.
Circles in a concentric circle are added according to the chronological order of the associated comments (ties are broken arbitrarily).
The innermost circle of a concentric circle is called a pivot. Intuitively, Kandinsky displays two types of concentric circles, namely
nucleus and peripheral. Concentric circles resulted from an original
comment and its replies is referred to as nucleus. In other words, in
a conversation network, the root and its children form a nucleus
1 The Kandinsky framework is orthogonal to the choice of text cleaning and topic modeling tech-

niques. Hence, any superior text cleaning or topic modelling technique designed for social comments
can be plugged into the framework.

1347

with the root being the pivot. On the other hand, replies at depth
equal to or greater than 2 in a conversation network (e.g., replies
to a reply) form separate concentric circles, referred to as peripherals. Peripherals are positioned on the periphery of a nucleus. For
instance, consider Figure 4(b), which visualizes the conversation
network in Figure 4(a) utilizing a group of concentric circles. The
color codes of the circles follow that of the comments. The nucleus
is created using Comments 1 (pivot), 2, 3, and 8. Note that 1 is the
original comment whereas 2, 3, and 8 are replies to it. On the other
hand, since the depths of Comments 4, 5, 6, and 7 in the network
are greater or equal to 2, two peripherals are generated with Comments 2 and 3 being pivots, respectively. Observe that a nucleus
represents an original comment that responds to an anchor post
(i.e., an initiator of discussions) whereas a peripheral represents
responses and discussions triggered by an original comment. These
collection of circles and concentric circles are positioned on the
Kandinsky Canvas by exploiting force-directed graph drawing.
Observe that the aforementioned visualization scheme on Kandinsky Canvas does not display the textual contents of comments. A
user may wish to view specific comments related to a discussion
thread. However, it can be cognitively challenging to visualize all
comments on a gui as an anchor post may garner hundreds of comments. Hence, we adopt the “details on demand” interface design
strategy for visualizing textual content by allowing a user to select
a part of a discussion in the Kandinsky Canvas that she may be
interested in. Specifically, when a user selects a circle or a concentric circle, the corresponding discussion thread will be revealed
in Panel 2, where each comment text is assigned a color bar that
corresponds to its color in the circle (or concentric circles) and its
thickness is proportional to its normalized like count. Moreover,
topic-specific keywords are highlighted with yellow color in each
comment. When a user selects a particular comment in Panel 2,
a list of similar comments from other discussion threads will be
shown by invoking the Similar Comments Finder module. The corresponding circles containing these similar comments are highlighted
with yellow bounding boxes. Note that in order to avoid retrieving too many comments and cluttering the gui, we retrieve top-10
comments that satisfy the similarity threshold δ .
A user may enter a keyword query in Panel 4 and comments
containing it will be highlighted in white bounding box for easy
visualization. One may click on any of these highlighted comments
to view its textual content containing the keyword.
To visualize the differences of a discussion landscape at two
different timestamps t 1 and t 2 , this module allows a user to first
load the Kandinsky Canvas at t 1 and then at t 2 . Opacity of the colors
of comments that exist in both t 1 and t 2 are subsided and only new
comments that occurred between these two timepoints are shown
in brighter colors.

3

RELATED SYSTEMS AND NOVELTY

Several works in the literature have focused on visualizing topics [8]
and networks [6]. More germane to this demo are efforts on visualizing social conversations [3, 4, 10]. Björn et. al. [4] used Squarified
Treemap Layout to visualize threaded discussion forums on devices
with small screen size. Intuitively, each tile in the Treemap corresponds to a node in the network. The position of the tile indicates
the importance of the thread, where the most discussed thread is

Demonstration Papers 3: Applications

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

Figure 6: Similar comments to a selected comment (in grey)
are shown in the middle panel. The locations of these comments are shown with yellow bounding boxes in the canvas.
the Kandinsky Canvas of this post. Observe that a single-color circle indicates a comment. The larger a circle, the more “likes” the
corresponding comment has garnered. Each concentric circle has
several colors as several users responded to the original comment.
Evolution of discussion threads. Figure 5 shows the evolution of the discussion. The marker highlighted in red shows that
major discussions occurred within a week after the post. The two
Kandinsky Canvases at two different timepoints (18th Oct, 2014
and 16th June, 2016) look almost the same – only a comment was
posted (highlighted by the red rectangular box) during this time.
Similar comments. A key feature of Kandinsky is to enable a
user to quickly identify and browse discussion threads that have
garnered considerable comments (e.g., bounded by the red box in
Figure 6). In particular, the concentric-circles view allows a user to
quickly zero in to such popular discussion threads. While browsing
Discussion 1, one may observe that one of the comments mentioned
about the U.S. Government’s ownership of patent of Ebola virus.
The user finds this intriguing and would like to find out if there is
any other comment that is similar to this. The most similar comment
found is related to patent ownership by CDC (marked as 2 in Figure
6), which is discussed in a separate discussion thread.
Keyword search. Kandinsky supports keyword search on the
discussion threads. For example, is it a conspiracy that the U.S.
Government is using Ebola as a population control? By searching
for “conspiracy”, we can visualize that there are several threads
(highlighted with white bounding box) involved in this discussion.

Figure 5: Kandinsky Canvas of Alex Jones’s post and evolution of the conversation.
placed in the upper left corner and those that are less active are in
the right bottom. Conversation landscape [3] is a 2D visualization of
a chat group where the x-axis and y-axis represent participants of a
conversation and timeline of postings by participants, respectively.
Each post is represented by a horizontal bar and the length of a
bar indicates the post length. PeopleGarden [10] portrays users’
interactions on social environment over time as a garden of flowers
where each flower represents a user and each petal is a post by
him/her. A flower “blossoms” as a user becomes more engaged in a
discussion. These approaches, however, do not leverage on circles
and concentric circles for visualization. Moreover, they do not effectively capture the contextual details and temporal differences of
a discussion. Kandinsky not only supports temporal view but also
enables retrieval of contextual details by supporting features such
as finding similar comments and keyword search.

REFERENCES
4

DEMONSTRATION OVERVIEW

[1] W. Kandinsky. Squares with concentric circles. http://www.kandinskypaintings.
org/squares-with-concentric-circles/.
[2] W. Kandinsky. Severak circles. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Vassily_
Kandinsky,_1926_-_Several_Circles,_Gugg_0910_25.jpg.
[3] J. Donath, K. Karahalios, F. B. Viégas. Visualizing Conversation. In HICSS, 1999.
[4] B. Engdahl, M. Köksal, G. Marsden. Using Treemaps to Visualize Threaded Discussion Forums on PDAs. In CHI, 2005.
[5] W. Huang, P. Eades, S.H. Hong. Measuring Effectiveness of Graph Visualizations:
A Cognitive Load Perspective. Inf. Vis., 8(3), 2009.
[6] C. D. G. Linhares, B. A. N. Travençolo, et al. DyNetVis: A System for Visualization
of Dynamic Networks. In ACM SAC, 2017.
[7] S. Lloyd. Least Squares Quantization in PCM. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theor., 28(2), 2006.
[8] T. Mitja, M. Grobelnik. Visualization of Online Discussion Forums. In Proceedings
of the First Workshop on Applications of Pattern Analysis, 2010.
[9] M. Turatto, G. Galfano. Color, Form and Luminance Capture Attention in Visual
Search. Vision Research, 40(13), 2000.
[10] R. Xiong, J. Donath. PeopleGarden: Creating Data Portraits for Users. In UIST,
1999.

Kandinsky is implemented using HTML/CSS and Javascript and is
running as a Chrome extension. Our demonstration will make available to the audience a few real anchor posts with different number
of comments in various social platforms. Users can also select their
own anchor posts. The key objective of the demonstration is to
enable the audience to interactively experience various features of
Kandinsky. We illustrate them with an example. A short video of
Kandinsky is available at https://youtu.be/eIDpB51m3Tc.
On 13th October 2014, controversial radio host Alex Jones published a post (i.e., anchor post) on Facebook, which discussed whether
Ebola was invented to depopulate, after American singer Chris
Brown claimed Ebola is a “form of population control”. The Facebook post garnered about 1,200 comments. Figure 5 (top) depicts

1348

