Demonstration Papers 2: Evaluation & Entities

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

A Pipeline for Disaster Response and Relief Coordination
Pranav Maneriker
Nikhita Vedula
{maneriker.1@,vedula.5}@osu.edu
Ohio State University

Ethan Kubatko
Desheng Liu
{kubatko.3,liu.738}@osu.edu
Ohio State University

Hussein S. Al-Olimat
hussein@knoesis.org
Kno.e.sis Center, Wright State
University

Krishnaprasad Thirunarayan
Valerie Shalin
Amit Sheth

Jiayong Liang
Omar El-Khoury
{liang.518,el-khoury.6}@osu.edu
Ohio State University

Srinivasan Parthasarathy
srini@cse.ohio-state.edu
Ohio State University

{tkprasad,valerie,amit}@knoesis.org
Kno.e.sis Center, Wright State
University

ABSTRACT

1

Natural disasters such as loods, forest ires, and hurricanes can
cause catastrophic damage to human life and infrastructure. We
focus on response to hurricanes caused by both river water looding and storm surge. Using models for storm surge simulation and
lood extent prediction, we generate forecasts about areas likely
to be highly afected by the disaster. Further, we overlay the simulation results with information about traic incidents to correlate
traic incidents with other data modality. We present these results
in a modularized, interactive map-based visualization, which can
help emergency responders to better plan and coordinate disaster
response.

Identifying standards and metrics for disaster resilience is a major
challenge of considerable interest to federal agencies [13]. Communities identify expected changes in vulnerabilities to natural
disasters and adapt their strategies accordingly [15]. Mitigating responses can be either pre- or post-disaster. Post-disaster response involves identifying the afected areas using multimodal data (e.g. unstructured text, location gazetteers, images), identifying the needs
of the afected victims, and matching them with irst responders [8].
In this work, we focus on the impact of loods and hurricanes
induced by storm surge. Post-disaster response to these disasters
requires image sources such as Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR)
imagery. We preprocess the images such that water corresponds
to areas darker in intensity, and can be detected by an appropriate
outlier detection framework (e.g. [10]). For forecasting, storm surge
simulation results can be produced using the ADCIRC (ADvanced
CIRCulation) model [4]. It is a inite element model used by a number of agencies and has been used for hindcasting prior hurricane
events, as well as a predictive tool for designing/planning against
future storms. Model predictions have shown good agreement with
measured ield data for a number of applications, including hindcasts of high water marks for many recent and historic storms [3].
By overlaying the predicted storm data on the true processed SAR
image, we establish the correctness of the predictive storm models.
Additionally, the impact of the storm can be further quantiied
by retrieving co-located traic incidents. To establish the importance of responding to storm predictions, we overlay, over the SAR
image, traic data that has been collected from the same time and
geolocation range as the storm. The traic data is a subset of a
larger dataset collected by Moosavi et al. [11]. The dataset contains
incidents related to low congestion and accidents, which can be
used as indicators of disaster impact.

CCS CONCEPTS
· Applied computing; · Information systems → Spatial-temporal
systems;

KEYWORDS
Storm Surge, Disaster Response, Spatio-temporal Modeling, Visualization, Traic Data
ACM Reference Format:
Pranav Maneriker, Nikhita Vedula, Hussein S. Al-Olimat, Jiayong Liang,
Omar El-Khoury, Ethan Kubatko, Desheng Liu, Krishnaprasad Thirunarayan,
Valerie Shalin, Amit Sheth, and Srinivasan Parthasarathy. 2019. A Pipeline
for Disaster Response and Relief Coordination. In Proceedings of the 42nd
International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’19), July 21ś25, 2019, Paris, France. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 4 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331405

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the irst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciic permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR ’19, July 21ś25, 2019, Paris, France
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6172-9/19/07. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331405

2

INTRODUCTION

RELATED WORK

Flood Mapping: Classical lood-mapping techniques rely upon
various kinds of thresholding [14]. Recently, more advanced methods model the image as graphs and ind looded regions by using cut
based, machine learning based and human input guided lood mapping [9]. In our work on lood mapping, we use a state-of-the-art

1337

Demonstration Papers 2: Evaluation & Entities

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

approach which models the lood mapping problem in an attributed
graph outlier detection framework [10].
Data Visualization: Previous work on visualizing structured
input on maps has been done using multiple layers with diferent
information [7, 8]. Following a similar approach, our tool visualizes
the data on water height, water velocity and traic information into
separate layers, which can be viewed independently and overlaid
on each other. Users can also temporally navigate through multiple
hours of data to visualize the evolution and progress of the storm.
Disaster forecasting: Forecasting for hurricane like disasters
can be done with two major classes of models - statistical models
that rely on global wind and forecasting patterns, and purely dynamical models that rely on the physics of luid motions. The latter
class is more popular today since they use iner spatial resolution
and sophisticated physical process representation to improve the
accuracy [16]. We utilize a inite element ADCIRC model, known
to have good agreement with measured ield data in a number of
storms, such as Hurricanes Rita and Katrina [2, 6].

3

into calibrated backscatter intensity in decibel units. Elevation data
from the National Elevation Dataset with a 1/3 arc-second spacing
is used to correct SAR geometric distortion. After preprocessing,
the SAR intensity is used for loodwater delineation. Given the
smooth surface and high dielectric constant, water shows weaker
SAR back scattering signal, thus corresponding to the darker areas
in the intensity image.
The storm surge model domain used for simulations includes the
Western North Atlantic, the Gulf of Mexico, and a large swath of
the Texas loodplain (see Figure 2). The domain consists of approximately 6.5 million elements, with sizes ranging from approximately
17 km in the deep ocean down to 10 m along the coast. Meteorological forcing for the model, which includes wind and pressure
ields, are obtained from Ocean Weather Inc. (courtesy of the Computational Hydraulics Group at UT Austin) and/or the National
Hurricane Center’s łbest trackž data [12]. Model output includes
piecewise linear surfaces of the water surface elevation and depthaveraged velocities deined over the entire extent of the domain at
time snaps of 1 hour.
Traic events shown in this demonstration have been retrieved
from a dataset which includes traic events since Aug 2016 [11]. The
dataset includes weather events, traic accidents and congestions,
and construction. For the purpose of the demonstration, we display
two types of events on the geographical map likely to have been
caused by a weather condition - accidents and congestion.

METHOD

Figure 1 shows the overall architecture and pipeline of our current
disaster relief framework. This version does not show the social
media data, but it is present in our previous work [8].
Geoparsing and Plotting Tweets

Flood Mapping using Satellite Images

Traffic Incidents
Water Velocity
Water Height

Storm Surge Model Simulation

Flood Map
Social Media Data
MapBox Map

Traffic Data Retrieval and Plotting

Figure 1: Let: Data generation. Right: Visualization layers.

3.1

Figure 2: Let: Extent of model domain used. Right: Model
details along the Texas coast.

Data sources

Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) imagery is suitable for lood mapping (predicting if an area is looded or not) thanks to its ability to
provide all-sky observations regardless of unfavorable illumination
and weather conditions, and its sensitivity to water. The satellite images in this demo are acquired by the Sentinel-1 C-band SAR in the
Interferometric Wide swath (IW) modes. The Sentinel-1 includes
two identical satellites enabling a revisit time of 6 days. The spatial
resolution reports adjacent targets Π with a distance of 20 meters in
range and 23 meters in azimuth direction, that are discernable. The
image has two polarizations deined by the SAR signal direction,
namely VV (vertically transmitted and vertically received) and VH
(vertically transmitted and horizontally received). Collected Highresolution Ground Range Detected (GRDH) product is processed
by using the Sentinel Application Platform (SNAP) from the ESA1 ,
with standard procedures of radiometric calibration and terrain
correction. The digital pixel values in GRDH are then converted
1 European

3.2

Web Visualization

The storm surge model outputs triangulated meshes of vertices
from which bathymetry (water depth) and velocity can be interpolated. However, each of these meshes is of very large size (ile
size > 100 MB for each hour of data) and it is not feasible to load
a new mesh into a web browser on every request. To overcome
the size limitation, we use a simple sampling strategy to get an approximation of the mesh. We sample a regular grid of points within
the bounds of the mesh. At each of the points, we compute the
values of interest - bathymetry, velocity_x and velocity_y. Finally,
we split these values into 256 levels, so that they can be encoded as
(R, G, B) colours into an image. The image ile generated from this
process is used as a texture map for the visualization. The range of
each of the parameters along with the bounds of the mesh is stored
in a separate json ile which can be loaded as needed. Using the
texture map, the geometry of the visualization can be generated

Space Agency

1338

Demonstration Papers 2: Evaluation & Entities

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

Figure 3: Right: Example results of the ADCIRC storm surge
model output compared to recorded data at NOAA’s Packery
Channel station. Let: Station location shown in red.

Figure 5: Top: Components of the interactive visualization.
Botom: Road accident information.

Figure 4: Right: Example results of the ADCIRC storm surge
model output compared to recorded data at NOAA’s Seadrift
Channel station. Let: Station location shown in red.
with WebGL at run time with an image ile < 1 MB in size. This
speeds up the visualization process.
The visualization is done using WebGL/ThreeJS2 based fragment
shaders for the bathymetry, and 3D cones for the water velocity. In
ThreeJS, it is possible to use BufferGeometry objects to map texture
images to screen coordinates. We create a custom object composed
of triangles, where each triangle is projected to the correct screen
coordinates as per the Web Mercator projection [1]. We generate
UV texture maps to correspond to the vertices so that the height
texture is mapped to the correct regions on the Mapbox3 map.

4

DEMONSTRATION

In the demo presented here, we hope to aid the process of disaster
response and relief. Users or irst responders using our tool have
access to structured traic incident data, and can obtain information about the best evacuation routes. In general, our pluggable,
modularized framework enables any spatio-temporal tagged data
(e.g., tweets) extracted by an IR system to be added to its overlay
visualization.
Figures 3 and 4 demonstrate the accuracy of the storm surge
model for Hurricane Harvey. In this hindcasting, we see that the
ADCIRC models capture the true water elevation accurately.
Figure 5 shows screenshots of all the controls ofered in our
framework. The diferent layers listed on the right can be toggled
for viewing diferent aspects of the visualizations and a slider on

Figure 6: Storm visualization. let: Approach, Right: Retreat

the top-right can be used to scroll through diferent hours from the
start of the storm. Darker (blue) colours (and longer length for wind
cones) indicate a higher value. Finally, hovering over the markers
provides information about traic incidents at that location.
We overlay the visualization of the sampled storm surge data
onto an interactive map. Figure 6 is a rendering of the evolution of
the storm across the time frame.We can see some hotspots of high
velocity and high depth in motion as the storm approaches land.

2 https://threejs.org/
3 https://www.mapbox.com/

1339

Demonstration Papers 2: Evaluation & Entities

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

5

CONCLUSION

Our proposed interactive visualization framework for disaster relief
and response demonstrates the efectiveness of storm surge modelling as an efective tool for early warning systems. By overlaying
traic data, we are able to see the impact that the storm has as it
evolves. Integrating this system with post-disaster lood maps as
well as real-time information from social media can give rise to an
efective disaster management and response framework.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported by the National Science Foundation grant
EAR-1520870. All content presented represents the opinion of the
authors, and is not necessarily endorsed by their sponsors.

REFERENCES
[1] S E Battersby, M P Finn, E L Usery, and K H Yamamoto. 2014. Implications of
web Mercator and its use in online mapping. Cartographica: The International
Journal for Geographic Information and Geovisualization (2014).
[2] C Dawson, E J Kubatko, J J Westerink, C Trahan, C Mirabito, C Michoski, and
N Panda. 2011. Discontinuous Galerkin methods for modeling hurricane storm
surge. Advances in Water Resources (2011).
[3] J C Dietrich, C N Dawson, J M Proft, M T Howard, G Wells, J G Fleming, R A
LuettichJr, J J Westerink, Z Lander, B O Blanton, C M Szpilka, and J H Atkinson.
2013. Real-time forecasting and visualization of hurricane waves and storm
surge using SWAN+ ADCIRC and FigureGen. Computational Challenges in the
Geosciences 156 (2013), 49ś70.
[4] J C Dietrich, S Tanaka, Joannes J Westerink, C N Dawson, R A Luettich, M
Zijlema, L H Holthuijsen, J M Smith, L G Westerink, and H J Westerink. 2012.
Performance of the unstructured-mesh, SWAN+ ADCIRC model in computing
hurricane waves and surge. Journal of Scientiic Computing (2012).
[5] C Domonoske. [n. d.]. Why Didn’t Oicials Order The Evacuation Of Houston?
NPR ([n. d.]). https://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2017/08/28/546721363/
why-didn-t-oicials-order-the-evacuation-of-houston
[6] M E Hope, J J Westerink, A B Kennedy, P C Kerr, J C Dietrich, C Dawson, C J
Bender, J M Smith, R E Jensen, M Zijlema, L H Holthuijsen, R A Luettich Jr, M D
Powell, J Cardone, A T Cox, H Pourtaheri, H J Roberts, J H Atkinson, S Tanaka,
H J Westerink, and L G Westerink. 2013. Hindcast and validation of Hurricane
Ike (2008) waves, forerunner, and storm surge. Journal of Geophysical Research:
Oceans (2013).
[7] P Simões Júnior, R Novais, V Vieira, L G Pedraza, M Mendonça, and K Villela.
2015. Visualization mechanisms for crowdsourcing information in emergency
coordination. In Proceedings of the Brazilian Symposium on Human Factors in
Computing Systems.
[8] S Kar, H S Al-Olimat, Thirunarayan, V L Shalin, A Sheth, and S Parthasarathy. 2018.
D-record: Disaster Response and Relief Coordination Pipeline. In Proceedings of
the 1st ACM SIGSPATIAL Workshop on Advances on Resilient and Intelligent Cities.
[9] J Liang, P Jacobs, and S Parthasarathy. 2018. Human-guided lood mapping: From
experts to the crowd. In Companion of The 2018 Web Conference.
[10] J Liang, P Jacobs, J Sun, and S Parthasarathy. 2018. Semi-supervised embedding
in attributed networks with outliers. In Proceedings of the 2018 SIAM International
Conference on Data Mining.
[11] S Moosavi, M H Samavatian, A Nandi, S Parthasarathy, and R Ramnath. 2019.
Short and Long-term Pattern Discovery Over Large-Scale Geo-Spatiotemporal
Data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.06792 (2019).
[12] The National Hurricane Center (NHC). [n. d.]. NHC Data Archive. https://www.
nhc.noaa.gov/data/. ([n. d.]). Accessed: 02-12-2019.
[13] SDR (Subcommittee on Disaster Reduction). 2005. Grand challenges for disaster
reduction. (2005).
[14] N Otsu. 1979. A threshold selection method from gray-level histograms. IEEE
transactions on systems, man, and cybernetics (1979).
[15] B Smit and J Wandel. 2006. Adaptation, adaptive capacity and vulnerability.
Global environmental change (2006).
[16] H E Willoughby, E N Rappaport, and F D Marks. 2007. Hurricane forecasting:
The state of the art. Natural Hazards Review (2007).

Figure 7: Top: Increased incidents during storm approach.
Botom: Fewer incidents during retreat.

Figure 8: Let: Storm Surge. Right: Flood Map. Darker
colours indicate higher water levels/higher lood impact

Next, we magnify the predictions of the storm surge model
around the Houston area. We observe that there is an increase
in traic incidents initially as the storm moves towards the coast.
They reach a peak around the midway point of the progress of
the storm. The probable reason for this is that residents of this
region begin evacuating, and inish evacuation over time. However,
evacuation warnings were not issued for Harvey [5]. This may
help explain the trends observed in the data. Figure 7 shows traic
incidents during the peak of the storm in comparison to the period
that the storm was retreating.
Finally, we compare the post processed lood mapped data with
the predictions on areas with high water elevation from the storm
surge model. Figure 8 shows an example at high magniication levels
in a coastal region. There is reasonable correspondence between
the intermediate storm surge and inal lood map data near the
coast. But as we go farther away from the coast (bottom right of
the map), the storm surge model has lowered resolution and cannot
predict the looded areas accurately.

1340

