SIRIP 2: Recommendation, search and advertising

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

Searching for Communities: a Facebook Way
Viet Ha-Thuc

Srinath Aaleti

vhathuc@fb.com
Facebook Inc.
Menlo Park, CA

Rongda Zhu

srinatha@fb.com
Facebook Inc.
Menlo Park, CA

Nade Sritanyaratana

rongdazhu@fb.com
Facebook Inc.
Menlo Park, CA

Corey Chen

nade@fb.com
Facebook Inc.
Menlo Park, CA

coreychen@fb.com
Facebook Inc.
Menlo Park, CA

ABSTRACT
Giving people the power to build community is central to Facebook’s mission. Technically, searching for communities poses very
different challenges compared to the standard IR problems. First,
there is a vocabulary mismatch problem since most of the content of
the communities is private. Second, the common labeling strategies
based on human ratings and clicks do not work well due to limited
public content available to third-party raters and users at search
time. Finally, community search has a dual objective of satisfying
searchers and growing the number of active communities. While
A/B testing is a well known approach for assessing the former, it is
an open question on how to measure progress on the latter. This
talk discusses these challenges in depth and describes our solution.

KEYWORDS
Privacy, embeddings, causal effect, counterfactual, explainability

Figure 1: Users can discover groups on Facebook Global
Search (left) or select Groups tab on the top-right corner to
switch to Group Vertical Search (right)

ACM Reference Format:
Viet Ha-Thuc, Srinath Aaleti, Rongda Zhu, Nade Sritanyaratana, and Corey
Chen. 2019. Searching for Communities: a Facebook Way. In Proceedings of
the 42nd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development
in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’19), July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 2 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331426

1

Compared to traditional search engines, e.g., Web search, searching for communities has unique challenges. First, many groups
on Facebook are closed groups, meaning that the group content
cannot be used to match with non-member’s queries. Second, it
is challenging for a third-party rater to accurately judge groups
due to their privacy, and user clicks have low correlation with user
long-term satisfaction since only limited content is available at
click time. Finally, as a part of a bigger ecosystem, the objective of
groups search is not only searcher satisfaction but also community
inventory growth on Facebook, which in turn will improve the
overall user experience with more communities to connect with.
While A/B testing is a well-known technique to measure the former,
it is an open question of how to measure the causal impact of search
improvements on the inventory (the document side).

INTRODUCTION

Connecting people with communities has been one of the top priorities of Facebook in the past few years. Among different channels,
search is a natural and effective way for users on Facebook to discover and connect with relevant communities. Figure 1 shows how
users can use the global Search (left) and vertical Search (right) to
find relevant groups (communities). In the former, different vertical
search engines (e.g., groups, events, people and videos) retrieve and
rank results within their verticals and then send the top results to
a federation system which blends these results. The focus of this
talk is on how to build such a vertical search for Facebook groups.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6172-9/19/07. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331426

2

PRIVACY AND VOCABULARY MISMATCH

Many communities on Facebook are closed groups. This means
only public information, such as their titles, descriptions and admin
tags like group topics are available to non-member searchers. The
actual posts inside are not visible to non-members until they join
the community; thus, post content cannot be used to match with
queries at search time. This creates a vocabulary mismatch problem
between queries and the limited text on the document side.

1381

SIRIP 2: Recommendation, search and advertising

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

Figure 4: Counterfactual Framework to Evaluate
months to collect new training data to re-train the ranker. To overcome this, we learn a few indicators available shortly after a user
joins a community (Step 4 on the funnel), e.g., time spent in the
community over the first few days, that are highly correlated with
long-term satisfaction. These indicators are then used in aggregate
in the multi-objective function to optimize the ranker for.

Figure 2: Learning Group and Term Embeddings

4

Figure 3: Engagement Funnel

To alleviate this, we learn an embedding [2] for each group from
its public information and embeddings for the terms in the vocabulary on the same space. To ensure fast retrieval at runtime, for
each group we index the most semantically similar terms based on
their embeddings. Figure 2 shows the system learning the group
and query embeddings. Query embeddings are pooled from the embeddings of query terms and n-grams. For each query, relevant and
non-relevant groups are inferred from click logs. The objective is to
jointly learn all of the embeddings such that the similarity between
a query and its relevant group is maximized and the similarity
between a query and its non-relevant group is minimized.

3

CAUSAL EFFECTS ON DOCUMENTS

Our study indicates that social communities typically require a
certain number of active members to stay active and grow over
time by themselves. These communities are called self-sustaining
groups. Unlike the traditional IR setting, our search system is a
part of a bigger ecosystem, and its objective is not only to optimize
searcher satisfaction but also to grow the number of self-sustaining
groups. As a simple strategy, given a ranking optimized for searcher
satisfaction, non-self-sustaining groups that are relevant to the
query and just below the self-sustaining threshold are promoted into
the top K. The idea is to give the nearly self-sustaining groups some
extra exposure so that they will attract enough active members and
grow by themselves. However, this leads to a challenge of how to
evaluate the number self-sustaining groups that the strategy gains.
To evaluate the causal effect on the groups, we propose a counterfactual framework. Instead of promoting all eligible documents,
we deterministically promote half of them, e.g., only groups with
even ID. As demonstrated in Figure 4, both groups 4 and 5 are eligible for promotion, but only group 4 gets promoted. The even and
odd promotion-eligible groups are logged in treatment and control,
respectively. Since we use a deterministic selection strategy, no
group can appear in both treatment and control, even though it
might be eligible for promotion in many sessions. The difference
in terms of the number of self-sustaining groups in treatment and
control after an experiment period is completely attributable to
the promotion. In a general setting, given a baseline and a new
ranking function aiming to promote a target set of documents, the
counterfactual framework can be used to measure the causal effect
of the ranking change on the documents.

OPTIMIZING LONG-TERM SATISFACTION

While inferring labeled data for the ranking function from clicks or
human labels is a common approach in literature [1], it does not
work well for community search. Given that many communities are
closed, it is challenging for a third-party rater to accurately judge
their relevance. At the same time, clicks have low correlation with
long-term satisfaction also because of limited content visible to the
searcher at the click time and a long funnel of user engagement
(Figure 3) from searching and clicking on a result to long-term
satisfaction. Long-term satisfaction is determined by activities and
social interactions with the communities over a long time (i.e.,
months) and satisfaction surveys. Our goal is to learn a ranking
function optimizing this long-term engagement.
Since long-term satisfaction takes a long time to determine, directly inferring labels from this causes practical issues. For instance,
when we make a change on the retrieval stage (e.g., query expansion) which alters the retrieved document distribution, it takes

5

CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we present the unique challenges of building Facebook
community search engine. We also lay out our approach addressing
these challenges while still respecting all existing privacy policies
as well as discuss some ongoing efforts.

REFERENCES
[1] Viet Ha-Thuc and Shakti Sinha. 2016. Learning to Rank Personalized Search
Results in Professional Networks. In Proceedings of the 39th ACM SIGIR. 461–462.
[2] Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. 2013. Efficient Estimation of Word Representations in Vector Space. CoRR abs/1301.3781 (2013).

1382

