Doctoral Consortium

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

Biomedical Heterogeneous Data Integration and Rank Retrieval
using Data Bridges
Priya Deshpande
Supervised by Dr. Alexander Rasin
DePaul University
Chicago, IL, USA
pdeshpa1@depaul.edu

framework [1]. IRIS incorporated medical ontologies to augment
search terms with synonyms and definitions [3]. An integrated
search may result in thousands of matches; thus, we are designing
a search algorithm that ranks results by incorporating context computed through a weighted ontology terms. For text-based search
ranking evaluation we used Normalized Discounted Cumulative
Gain (NDCG) 1 algorithm to measure the quality of search result
ranking. Our analysis showed an improvement in ranked retrieval
as compared to other search engines. To generalize our solution
to heterogeneous biomedical data sources, we plan to create data
adapters to serve as a bridge between data providers and the data
integration and search framework [4].

ABSTRACT
Digitized world demands data integration systems that combine
data repositories from multiple data sources. Vast amounts of clinical and biomedical research data are considered a primary force enabling data-driven research toward advancing health research and
for introducing efficiencies in healthcare delivery. Data-driven research may have many goals, including but not limited to improved
diagnostics processes, novel biomedical discoveries, epidemiology,
and education. However, finding and gaining access to relevant
data remains an elusive goal. We identified these challenges and
developed an Integrated Radiology Image Search (IRIS) framework
that could be a step toward aiding data-driven research. We propose building data bridges to support retrieving ranked relevant
documents from integrated repository.
My research focuses on biomedical data integration and indexing
systems that provides ranked document retrieval from an integrated
repository. Although we currently focus on integrating biomedical
data sources (for medical professionals), we believe that our proposed framework and methodologies can be used in other domains
as well.
Research Questions: How to identify and integrate biomedical
heterogeneous data sources? How to find diagnostically relevant
documents from integrated repository?
Several studies have highlighted the need to integrate clinical reports and images into databases with advanced search capabilities.
Gutmark et al. [5] argued for building a system that reduces errors in
radiological image interpretation using case file databases. Talanow
et al. [6] described a reference radiological system for diagnosis,
teaching needs, research, and the resulting need for an advanced
reference search engine. We applied unsupervised machine learning
techniques that performs coverage analysis and of data sources and
ontologies. By learning data repositories contents, one can decide
which data sources need to be integrated or what repository content is lacking. Thus, this coverage analysis algorithm benefits data
integration process by extracting knowledge about the repositories.
Our analysis showed that data integration is a continuous, iterative
process [2]. To start with the integration of healthcare data sources,
We developed IRIS as a pilot study for a healthcare data integration

CCS CONCEPTS
• Data integration; • Biomedical information retrieval; • Metadata indexing; • Data bridges;

KEYWORDS
Biomedical data integration, Metadata indexing, Information retrieval, Medical ontology, Query expansion
ACM Reference Format:
Priya Deshpande and Supervised by Dr. Alexander Rasin. 2019. Biomedical
Heterogeneous Data Integration and Rank Retrieval using Data Bridges.
In Proceedings of the 42nd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research
and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’19), July 21–25, 2019, Paris,
France. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1 page. https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.
3331417

REFERENCES
[1] Deshpande, P., Rasin, A., Brown, E., Furst, J., Raicu, D., Montner, S., and Armato III,
S. (2017). An integrated database and smart search tool for medical knowledge
extraction from radiology teaching files. In Medical Informatics and Healthcare, pages
10–18.
[2] Deshpande, P., Rasin, A., Brown, E., Furst, J., Raicu, D. S., Montner, S. M., and
Armato, S. G. (2018a). Big data integration case study for radiology data sources. In
2018 IEEE Life Sciences Conference (LSC), pages 195–198. IEEE.
[3] Deshpande, P., Rasin, A., Brown, E. T., Furst, J., Montner, S. M., Armato III, S. G.,
and Raicu, D. S. (2018b). Augmenting medical decision making with text-based search
of teaching file repositories and medical ontologies: Text-based search of radiology
teaching files. International Journal of Knowledge Discovery in Bioinformatics (IJKDB),
8(2):18–43.
[4] Deshpande, P., Rasin, A., Furst, J., Raicu, D., and Antani, S. (2019). Diis: A biomedical
data access framework for aiding data driven research supporting fair principles.
Data, 4(2):54.
[5] Gutmark, R., Halsted, M. J., Perry, L., and Gold, G. (2007). Use of computer databases
to reduce radiograph reading errors. Journal of the American College of Radiology,
4(1):65–68.
[6] Talanow, R. (2009). Radiology teacher: a free, internet-based radiology teaching
file server. JACR, 6(12):871–875.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6172-9/19/07.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331417

1 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Discounted_cumulative_gain

1449

