SIRIP 2: Recommendation, search and advertising

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

Simulacra and Selection
Clothing Set Recommendation at Stitch Fix
Kevin Zielnicki
Stitch Fix
San Francisco CA USA

kzielnicki@stitchfix.com
ABSTRACT

CCS CONCEPTS

Choosing a set of items from an inventory is a common
problem faced by customers of nearly any retailer.
Modern retailers aid and influence customer decisions,
using techniques like recommender systems and market
basket analysis to deliver personalized and contextual
item suggestions. While such methods typically just
augment a traditional browsing experience, Stitch Fix goes
a step further by exclusively delivering curated selections
of
items,
via
algorithmically-assisted
stylist
recommendations. Our understanding of the human-inthe-loop element in this selection process is crucial to
building effective tools to assist stylists in delivering
personalized items.

• Information systems~Recommender
systems • Computing methodologies~Factorization
methods • Information systems~Probabilistic retrieval
models

KEYWORDS: Recommendation Systems; Factorization
Models; Set Selection

BIOGRAPHY
Kevin Zielnicki leads a team of Data Scientists focused on
optimizing Stitch Fix’s human-in-the-loop styling process
with contextual recommendations. Expert stylists leverage
Stitch Fix’s rich and unique fashion data to power tools
and algorithms that help millions of clients find clothing
they love. Kevin is particularly interested in the impact
algorithms can have when used as an amplifier for human
creativity. He holds a Physics Ph.D. in Optical Quantum
Information, and now appreciates working work with data
that can be observed without changing its value.

When stylists at Stitch Fix select an assortment of clothing
for a client, they consider many nuanced relationships
between the items, as well as with the client. For example,
a stylist may fill a client’s request for a work outfit by
choosing pants and a blouse that pair well together, as
well as fitting the client’s stated preferences and her
inferred sense of style. This can be described as a
contextual subset selection problem, where the goal is to
assemble a conditionally optimal set of items, given
inventory constraints and context. I will discuss our
nonlinear factorization approach to contextual subset
selection, the application to a human-in-the-loop
recommendation system, and connections to related
problems.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this
work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.
SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France.
© 2019 Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6172-9/19/07.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331442

1379

