Doctoral Consortium

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

Characterizing the Stages of Complex Tasks
Jiqun Liu

School of Communication and Information, Rutgers University
New Brunswick, New Jersey
jl2033@scarletmail.rutgers.edu
actions and strategies as well as proactive search paths recommendations. Specifically, based on our recent research progresses
on users’ intentions, problems, and task-based search interactions
(e.g., [2–4]), this work seeks to answer the following questions:
• RQ1 What are the stages of complex search tasks in terms
of query-level search intentions, encountered problems, and
search tactics?
• RQ2 What are the relations between different task stages?
• RQ3 How can we evaluate a search path using the multidimensional task stage framework?
• RQ4 How can we proactively offer useful system supports
before actual search problems and difficulties happen?
Given the nature of the above research questions, this dissertation work consists of two parts. The first part includes two controlled lab studies where I controlled task types and collected data
on multiple dimensions of search from users (e.g., search intentions,
encountered problems and preferred helps, search actions), aiming
to characterize task stages from different perspectives and also to
understand the underlying connections among various states (RQ1
& RQ2). A multidimensional stage framework of complex task will
be constructed based on the findings from user studies as well as the
relevant constructs from existing literature (e.g., Human problem
solving [5]). The second part is a large scale experiment where I will
run simulations based on the data collected from existing user studies and large-scale search logs and iteratively evaluate search paths
as "users’ policies in uncertain environments" using Reinforcement
Learning approach. The proposed task stage framework will be
employed to characterize the states, actions, and rewards in search
paths. Finally, I will approach RQ4 as a policy optimization problem
for unknown Markov Decision Process (MDP) and evaluate the
quality of improved policies as (simulated) recommendations.

ABSTRACT
Stage is an essential facet of task. At different stages of search, users’
search strategies are often influenced by different search intentions,
encountered problems, as well as knowledge states. In previous
studies, information seeking and interactive IR researchers have
developed and validated some frameworks for describing various
task facets and features. However, few studies have explored how to
depict and differentiate different stages or states of complex search
tasks in a comprehensive, multidimensional manner. The existing
theoretical models of search process offer limited contributions to
search path evaluation and the design of system recommendations
for users at different states. To address this issue at both theoretical
and empirical levels, my dissertation aims to construct an explainable framework that can characterize the stages or states of complex
search tasks over multiple dimensions and to apply the framework
in proactive search path evaluation and recommendation.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems → Users and interactive retrieval.

KEYWORDS
Complex task; Multidimensional task stage; Information searching

1

MOTIVATION

Tasks of different types often emerge from evolving, continuous
problematic situations when people interact with various elements
embedded in their life-worlds. Search systems and technologies
have experienced phenomenal success in recent years, especially in
addressing fact-finding and navigational search tasks [6]. However,
current search systems, interaction models, and the underlying
algorithms still face plenty of challenges when applied in supporting complex tasks which involve multi-round, multidimensional
search interactions and iterations (e.g., planning a research project,
evaluating retirement packages) [1]. One of the major challenges
in facilitating complex task is understanding and supporting the
implicit task stages or states in search interactions.

2

3

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

I would like to thank my advisor, Dr. Chirag Shah. This work is
supported by National Science Foundation grant IIS-1717488.

REFERENCES

RESEARCH QUESTIONS AND METHODS

[1] J Shane Culpepper, Fernando Diaz, and Mark D Smucker. 2018. Research Frontiers
in Information Retrieval: Report from the Third Strategic Workshop on Information
Retrieval in Lorne (SWIRL 2018). In ACM SIGIR Forum, Vol. 52. ACM, 34–90.
[2] Jiqun Liu. 2017. Toward a unified model of human information behavior: An
equilibrium perspective. Journal of Documentation 73, 4 (2017), 666–688.
[3] Jiqun Liu, Matthew Mitsui, Nicholas J. Belkin, and Chirag Shah. 2019.
Task,information seeking intentions, and user behavior: Toward a multi-level
understanding of Web search. In Proceedings of CHIIR 2019. ACM.
[4] Jiqun Liu, Yiwei Wang, Soumik Mandal, and Chirag Shah. 2019. Exploring the
immediate and short-term effects of peer advice and cognitive authority on Web
search behavior. Information Processing and Management 56, 3 (2019), 1010–1025.
[5] Allen Newell, Herbert Alexander Simon, et al. 1972. Human problem solving.
Vol. 104. Prentice-Hall Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
[6] Ryen White. 2016. Interactions with search systems. Cambridge University Press.

The ultimate goal of this dissertation is to establish a multidimensional framework that can (1) characterize the stages or states of
complex search tasks and (2) facilitate the evaluation of search
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6172-9/19/07. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331413

1445

