Doctoral Consortium

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

Implicit Entity Recognition, Classification and Linking in Tweets
Hawre Hosseini

hawre.hosseini@ryerson.ca
Laboratory for Systems, Software and Semantics (LS3 ), Ryerson University
Toronto, Canada
most prevalent classes of entity mentions as well as instances of
those mentions. We aim at providing such a dataset.
RG2. Implicit Named Entity Linking (INEL). Having recognized
implicit mention of an entity, the next step is to link it to the corresponding knowledge base entry. Therefore, linking implicit mentions comprises a research line of this thesis. The authors in [5]
have proposed an approach to perform implicit entity linking. Their
method is heavily based on exploiting the linked data present in the
knowledge graph. While this source of information is invaluable
and has proven helpful in previous studies, we aim at exploiting
different information resources in order to improve both efficiency
as well as effectiveness of the linking process.
RG3. Implicit Named Entity Linking Applications. The other research direction is to investigate the value-add that INEL provides to
systems using named entity recognition. For instance, how can linking implicit mentions of user generated content boost performance
of news recommendation systems? This is particularly important
as traditional NEL systems fall short in linking implicit mentions,
mainly since they rely on recognizing and linking explicit mentions,
which have a surface form in text. Another research question is the
applicability of the notion of implicit mentions and its pertinent
methods to different information extraction schemes and frameworks. For instance, how can we extract structured information
from unstructured sources with a high degree of precision?
This proposed PhD research is accomplished in three main
phases. In Phase 1, we have accomplished the second part of research goal 1, i.e. preparing a gold standard dataset [3]. Furthermore,
we have developed and evaluated an approach in order to accomplish research goal 2 [2]. In phase 2, we aim at performing INERC
using the resources provided through Phase 1. In the last phase, we
aim at applying the developed models of the previous phases for
different purposes as described in research goal 3.

ABSTRACT
Linking phrases to knowledge base entities is a process known as
entity linking and has already been widely explored for various
content types such as tweets [1][4][6]. A major step in entity linking
is to recognize and/or classify phrases that can be disambiguated
and linked to knowledge base entities, i.e., Named Entity Recognition
and Classification. Unlike common entity recognition and linking
systems, however, we aim to recognize, classify, and link entities
which are implicitly mentioned, and hence lack a surface form, to
appropriate knowledge base entries. In other words, the objective
of our work is to recognize and identify core entities of a tweet
when those entities are not explicitly mentioned; this process is
referred to as Implicit Named Entity Recognition and Linking [5] [2].

1

OVERVIEW

Prior work [3][5] has shown that a noticeable amount of tweets
contain implicit mentions to entities; therefore, performing implicit
entity linking is expected to offer a considerable amount of value
to systems that leverage entity linking as a component. Most notably, implicit entity linking is expected to result in a more precisely
targeted information extraction in such applications as, sentiment
analysis, trend detection, event monitoring, and news recommendation. As another example, identifying user needs in dialogue
systems might require detection of implicit mentions. In this paper,
we present our research goals (RGs) and progress so far.
RG1. Implicit Named Entity Recognition and Classification (INERC). Traditional named entity linking is comprised of two steps:
first, named entity recognition and classification (NERC), which involves recognizing the phrase that is probably referring to a named
entity and classifying the type of the entity it should be linked to;
and second, named entity linking (NEL) which is the act of linking the recognized phrase to a unique entity in a knowledge base,
which is usually performed in two steps, i.e., candidate selection
and candidate disambiguation. One of the limitations of prior work
is that they overlook the first step, i.e., NERC, by assuming that
a given tweet contains an implicit entity of a known type. This
assumption makes the implicit entity linking step of little practical
use to real world problems. Therefore, a research goal is to perform
implicit named entity recognition and classification (INERC). A
major resource required is a gold standard dataset similar to those
provided in traditional NERC; such datasets provide a taxonomy of

REFERENCES
[1] Leon Derczynski, Diana Maynard, Giuseppe Rizzo, Marieke van Erp, Genevieve
Gorrell, Raphaël Troncy, Johann Petrak, and Kalina Bontcheva. 2015. Analysis
of named entity recognition and linking for tweets. Information Processing &
Management 51, 2 (2015), 32–49.
[2] Hawre Hosseini, Tam T. Nguyen, and Ebrahim Bagheri. 2018. Implicit Entity
Linking Through Ad-Hoc Retrieval. In IEEE/ACM 2018 International Conference on
Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining, ASONAM 2018, Barcelona, Spain,
August 28-31, 2018. 326–329. https://doi.org/10.1109/ASONAM.2018.8508612
[3] Hawre Hosseini, Tam T. Nguyen, Jimmy Wu, and Ebrahim Bagheri. 2019. Implicit
Entity Linking in Tweets: an Ad-hoc Retrieval Approach. Applied Ontology (2019).
[4] Xiaohua Liu, Yitong Li, Haocheng Wu, Ming Zhou, Furu Wei, and Yi Lu. 2013. Entity Linking for Tweets. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). 1304–1311.
[5] Sujan Perera, Pablo N. Mendes, Adarsh Alex, Amit P. Sheth, and Krishnaprasad
Thirunarayan. 2016. Implicit Entity Linking in Tweets. In ESWC’16. 118–132.
[6] Alan Ritter, Sam Clark, Oren Etzioni, et al. 2011. Named entity recognition
in tweets: an experimental study. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing. Association for Computational Linguistics,
1524–1534.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6172-9/19/07. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331416

1448

