Workshop

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

ECOM’19: The SIGIR 2019 Workshop on eCommerce
Jon Degenhardt

Surya Kallumadi

Utkarsh Porwal

Andrew Trotman

eBay Inc.
jdegenhardt@ebay.com

Home Depot
surya@ksu.edu

eBay Inc.
uporwal@ebay.com

University of Otago
andrew@cs.otago.ac.nz
account the tradeoffs across various facets b) recommendations
based on entity similarity c) recommendations based on user location (e.g. shipping cost). In the case of eCommerce search and recommendation these challenges require an understanding of product
attributes, user behavior, and query context. Product sites are also
characterized by the presence of a dynamic inventory with a high
rate of change and turnover, and a long tail of query distribution.
The features available for machine learning and for building
click models are different in eCommerce than in web search. As
well as queries, hover time, clicks, and browse times, eCommerce
sites also have add-to-basket, purchase, remove-from-basket, return
faulty goods, and so on. When incorporating online (and offline)
promotions, personalization (such as individual pricing) the click
models are vastly more complex than seen for web search.
Outside of search but still within IR, the same feature in different domains can have a different meaning. For example, in email
filtering the presence of a product name along with a price is a
strong indication of spam, but within an auction setting this likely
indicates a valid product. Natural language translation also differs
from other domains – company names, product names, and even
product descriptions do not translate well with existing tools. Similar problems exist with knowledge graphs that are not customised
to match the product domain.
This workshop will bring together researchers and practitioners
in order to identify and discuss core research problems in eCommerce search and recommendation. This serves many purposes.
First, collaboration: it will bring the community together in a way
that rarely happens. Second, funds: it will attract research funding
to this increasing important domain. Third, research: it will attract
researchers to eCommerce and product search. Finally, it will help
broaden the definition of Information Retrieval at conferences such
as SIGIR.
The workshop will continue to examine data availability. ECOM
2018 secured the release of data from Rakuten, who ran a classification data challenge. ECOM19 is working with eBay on the
release data for a search task. As the purpose of a product site is to
make entity data publicly available, the same security concerns that
plague other search domains do not exist. However sales and seller
information is private and proprietary and likely to be unavailable.

ABSTRACT
eCommerce Information Retrieval is receiving increasing attention
in the academic literature, and is an essential component of some
of the largest web sites (such as eBay, Amazon, Airbnb, Alibaba,
Taobao, Target, Facebook, Home Depot, and others). These kinds of
organisations clearly value the importance of research into Information Retrieval. The purpose of this workshop is to bring together
researchers and practitioners of eCommerce IR to discuss topics
unique to it, to set a research agenda, to examine how to build data
sets, and how evaluate algorithms for research into this fascinating
topic.
eCommerce IR is ripe for research and has a unique set of problems. For example, in eCommerce search there may be no hypertext
links between documents (products); there is a click stream, but
more importantly, there is often a buy stream. eCommerce problems are wide in scope and range from user interaction modalities
through to dynamic updates of a rapidly changing collection on
auction sites, and the experienceness of some products (such as
Airbnb bookings).
This workshop is a follow up to very successful workshops held
at SIGIR 2017 and SIGIR 2018. This year we will be running a data
challenge (sponsored by eBay) which will allow us to follow up on
multiple aspects that were discussed in the previous workshops (in
particular, deterministic rank orders and how to evaluate these).

1

MOTIVATION

In this workshop we will explore approaches for search and recommendations of products, as well as other aspects of eCommerce
Information Retrieval. Although the task is the same as web-page
search (fulfill a user’s information need), the way in which this is
achieved is different. On product sites, the traditional web-page
ranking features are either not present or are present in a different
form.
The entities that need to be discovered (the information that
fulfills the need) might be unstructured, associated with structure,
semi-structured, or have facets such as: price, ratings, title, description, and seller location. Domains with such facets raise interesting
challenges such as a) relevance and ranking functions that take into
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6172-9/19/07.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331643

2

RELATED WORKSHOPS

ECOM19 builds on previous workshops at SIGIR 20171 and SIGIR
2018.2 by putting some of the work presented there into practice
1 http://sigir-ecom.weebly.com/
2 https://sigir-ecom.github.io

1421

Workshop

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

with the data challenge – in particular the work on deterministic
sort orders (such as price low to high).
The SIGIR 2018 tutorial “Information Discovery in E-commerce”3
provides much of the necessary background to delegates who might
need to understand state of the art before attending the workshop.
The IJCAI-17 Workshop on AI Applications in E-Commerce (WAAE
2017) dealt with some of the research areas that our workshop will
cover, however the scope of WAAE was much broader. Product
search and eCommerce IR was a small aspect in a wide range of
topics chosen to be addressed by WAAE. The Web Conference
ran the “First Workshop on e-Commerce and NLP”,4 covering a
complementary field, NLP.
Prior data challenges include the Rakuten challenge at our SIGIR
2018 workshop 5 and the “CIKM Cup 2016 Track 2: Personalized
E-Commerce Search Challenge”.6
The ACM SIGecom runs an annual conference that includes
search as well as recommendation in the cfp. However, for many
years search has not been well represented at this conference.
This workshop is related to the ESAIR series of workshops that
explored semantic annotation – product annotation is commonly
seen in eCommerce sites.

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

3.2

The use of external features such as reviews and ratings
User interfaces
Reviews and sentiment analysis
The use of social signals in ranking and beyond
The balance between revenue and relevance
Trust and security
Live experimentation
Questions and answering, chat bots for eCommerce
Cross-Lingual search and machine translation
Resources and data sets

Data Challenge

The primary theme is eCommerce search and recommendation.
The purpose of the workshop is to provide a venue for publication
and discussion of Information Retrieval research and ideas as they
pertain to products and eCommerce. We will be bringing together
practitioners and researchers from academia and industry to discuss
the challenges and approaches to search and recommendation.
The goal is to foster collaboration and discussion with the broader
IR community. We are happy to state that we have an agenda to
raise awareness within the academic community of the problems
faced by this domain.

The ECOM18 workshop and Rakuten run the data challenge “Taxonomy Classification for eCommerce-scale Product Catalogs” in
which participants addressed the problem of taking a product listing
and choosing which category (from a taxonomy) that listing should
belong. For ECOM19 we are working with eBay to secure a release
of item data as well as queries and assessments for a search task. In
particular we are examining relevance of for deterministic sort orders (e.g. price low to high). The task is to take the query, search the
document collection, and to rank the results on price. This might
appear to be a trivial problem, but it raises questions on assessment
(how can we know that the assessments contain the lowest price
relevant item?). It raises questions on evaluation (how should we
score a run missing the lowest price item?). It raises questions on
query semantics (does a user searching for “apple” want an apple or
an Apple?). It raises questions about relevance (e.g. is a smartphone
case relevant for a smartphone query?). Relevance (or otherwise)
of these accessory items is especially problematic for deterministic
sort orders as such items are often inexpensive and consequently
can appear at the top of the SERP. Indeed, publications at ECOM18
discussed some of these problems – and we will put some of that
work into practice.

3.1

4

3

THEME AND PURPOSE

Scope

The workshop relates to all aspects of eCommerce search and recommendations. Research topics and challenges that are usually
encountered in this domain include:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Machine learning techniques for eCommerce applications
Semantic representation for users, products, services & queries
Structured data and faceted search
Query intent, suggestion, and auto-completion
Temporal dynamics for Search and Recommendation
Models for relevance and ranking for multi-faceted entities
Deterministic sorting of results lists (e.g. price low to high)
Click models for eCommerce domain
Session aware, and session oriented search
Knowledge graphs and ontologies for eCommerce
Personalization & contextualization
Indexing and search in a rapidly changing environment
Diversity in product search and recommendations
Strategies for resolving extremely low (or no) recall queries

3 https://sites.google.com/view/sigir2018-info-ec/home

4 https://sites.google.com/view/ecnlp

5 https://sigir-ecom.github.io/data-task.html

6 https://competitions.codalab.org/competitions/11161

1422

WORKSHOP FORMAT

This workshop is a full day workshop. It will start with an invited
talk from a well respected practitioner (or academic) who is tackling
eCommerce search problems. Next will be presentation of selected
papers. We will then break-out into small groups to identify key
areas for future research in eCommerce search – with special emphasis on future data challenges. After lunch there will be a second
invited talk, then a poster session. We will finish with a panel session. The workshop schedule and activities are structured to contain
substantial time for discussion and engagement by all participants.

5

WORKSHOP OUTCOMES

The most important outcome of the workshop is the discussion
between delegates. It is these discussions that lead to collaboration
and future research – unarguably the ultimate goal of any workshop.
We will capture what we can in the form of a SIGIR Forum workshop
report.
An additional goal is to raise awareness of the fascinating problems that litter the eCommerce search battlefield. We hope that
through discussion at the workshop, and SIGIR 2019, we can help
steer the research community towards these problems and in doing
so find solutions to some very difficult problems.

