Doctoral Consortium

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

Event Information Retrieval from Text
Rashmi Sankepally

Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland, College Park (USA)
rashmi@umd.edu
further develop this line of work to identify ways to automatically
decompose high level events into their components.
With the goal of extending the event retrieval work to an organizational setting, in my second line of research I plan to work
with the Avocado email collection [3]. While newswire text and
other Web pages are easily available for everyone’s perusal, email
content is interesting because it may contain organizational and
personal events that differ from those found in news, and those
events may be referred to in less fully contextualized ways. In this
line of research, I want to build a retrieval system for events in
this genre of personal and organizational content. The retrieval
system will provide a diverse ranking covering the full range of
subevents for which information is available. To do this, I will need
a reusable test collection containing event-related topics, with the
event nuggets within those documents annotated for relevance.
This annotation at the event nugget level will support computing
measures like α-nDCG [2] in which the gain reflects in part the
number of different event nuggets in a document.
The third stage of my work will be more exploratory, since there
are many ways in which one might conceptualize event impact.
My initial approach will be to explore alternative indicators for
different types of impact. For example, the societal impact of news
stories might be characterized by the number of readers, whereas
the personal impact of an email might be characterized by the
time before a reply is received. I am particularly interested in how
sentiment analysis might be used to characterize event impact,
particularly with reference to publicly available user-generated
content.

ABSTRACT
Events are an integral part of our day-to-day search needs. Users
search for various kinds of events such as political events, organizational announcements, policy changes, personal events, criminal
activity and so on. In linguistics, events are often thought of as
discourse entities with associated complex structure and attributes.
Many professionals look for patterns that involve event occurrences. Journalists, financial analysts, intelligence analysts, attorneys conducting investigations, auditors examining corporate
records are examples of users who may want to find such information and to arrange it in ways that can help to produce meaningful
analyses.
The goal of this work is to develop effective information retrieval
systems that can help users to satisfy event-related information
needs. My particular interest is in events that are decomposable
into subevents in ways that can be anticipated. I am interested in
modeling decomposable events, and in automatically recognizing
references to subevents, both to help with finding relevant documents and to help with presenting diverse results to the user.
I plan to pursue this broader goal in three stages, each of which
involves creating a test collection. I have started by developing
information retrieval test collections for news, building on existing collections of news stories from the Text Analysis Conference
(TAC) [4] and the Topic Detection and Tracking Evaluations [1].
Next, I plan to build a new event ontology for email, and use that
ontology as a basis for building an information retrieval collection
from the Avocado Email collection. Finally, I plan to extend one or
both of these test collections to support research on characterizing event impact, thus perhaps providing an additional basis for
ranking.
In each stage of my work, new test collection(s) will enable new
research. In my first stage, which is in progress, I have studied the
effect of automatically detected subevents on ranking effectiveness.
Using the Rich Entities, Relations and Events (ERE) ontology of
event types and subtypes from the TAC Event track [5], and two existing automated event detection systems, I have developed a simple
bag of words-and-events search system that uses the automatically
detected event type information. I also built an information retrieval test collection from a Topic Detection and Tracking (TDT)
collection, for which event-based topics exist. Evaluation results
show promise when compared to baseline approaches. I plan to

CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems → Information extraction; Ontologies;
Novelty in information retrieval; Test collections.

KEYWORDS
event, event type, event detection, diversity, event impact
ACM Reference Format:
Rashmi Sankepally. 2019. Event Information Retrieval from Text. In Proceedings of the 42nd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’19), July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1 page. https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331415

REFERENCES
[1] James Allan. 2002. Introduction to Topic Detection and Tracking. In Topic Detection
and Tracking. Springer, 1–16.
[2] Charles Clarke et al. 2008. Novelty and diversity in information retrieval evaluation.
In SIGIR. 659–666.
[3] Douglas Oard et al. 2015. Avocado Research Email Collection LDC2015T03. https:
//catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/LDC2015T03
[4] Teruko Mitamura et al. 2017. Events Detection, Coreference and Sequencing:
What’s next? Overview of the TAC KBP 2017 Event Track.. In TAC.
[5] LDC. 2016. Rich ERE Annotation Guidelines Overview V4.2. https://tac.nist.gov/
2016/KBP/guidelines/summary_rich_ere_v4.2.pdf

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6172-9/19/07.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331415

1447

