SIRIP 4: Legal IR

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

Looking for Opportunities:
Challenges in Professional Procurement Search
Stuart Mackie

University of Strathclyde

David MacDonald

Leif Azzopardi

BiP Solutions

University of Strathclyde

(specifying the required goods, services, or works). Businesses seeking to supply goods, services, or works into the public sector can
submit bids (i.e. tender) for procurement contracts. However, before
businesses can tender for procurement contracts, they must first
find relevant contract opportunities. Second, there exist procurement award notices – disclosing which business successfully won
a previously advertised public procurement contract.
Several country-specific procurement portals exist for the purpose of publishing procurement notices and awards. Examples include “Contracts Finder” (UK), “Tenders Electronic Daily” (EU), or
“Federal Business Opportunities” (USA). Further, several institutionspecific portals exist for the purposes of publishing procurement
contracts, e.g. health boards, armed forces, or universities.
Each day such procurement portals publish new contract opportunities, so businesses searching for relevant opportunities need to
visit multiple portals, and issue repeat queries on a regular basis.
Since the opportunities only remain open for a certain period of
time, i.e. tenders must be received within a certain number of days
after publication, it is important that businesses find out about
opportunities as they arise. And so, often an aggregated search
service is employed that combines feeds from different country
and authority specific portals, to reduce the burden of repeatedly
searching multiple portals. At BiP Solutions5 , we operate one of the
market leading procurement contracts search engines, Tracker6 ,
which indexes over 120,000 new contract notices and awards each
month, aggregating information from over 1,500 different sources.
Push vs. Pull. Commercial search engine vendors operating
within the procurement contracts vertical typically offer two key
services. Users may enter queries manually, and in a manner similar
to ad-hoc web search, interact with a search engine results page.
Further, procurement search engines often store customer queries
that are executed on a regular basis (e.g. daily), with search results
being delivered via an email. This is known in the industry as a
tender alerts service. We may then characterise procurement search
as either pull (i.e. ad-hoc search) or push (i.e. tender alerts).
A Professional Search Task. In contrast to ad-hoc web search,
we characterise procurement contract search as a professional
search task [3]. This task involves business users searching for
economic opportunities, with high economic value associated with
the outcomes. Over the years there has been great interest in creating search systems to help professionals find relevant information
to inform a decision, answer a question, or make a recommendation,
e.g. patent, legal, medical, or recruitment search [1, 2].
Professional search differs from casual/leisure search in a number of ways, e.g. the searches are carried out for financial benefit,
are within a particular domain, with a specified and typically complex brief, have a high value, and are performed under constraints

ABSTRACT
Procurement legislation stipulates that information about the goods,
services, or works, that tax-funded authorities wish to purchase are
made publicly available in a procurement contract notice. However,
for businesses wishing to tender for such competitive opportunities, finding relevant procurement contract notices presents a
challenging professional search task. In this talk, we will provide an
overview of procurement search and then describe the challenges
in addressing the related search and recommendation tasks.

1

INTRODUCTION

Public procurement is the process of tax-funded authorities purchasing goods, services, or works. Examples of tax-funded authorities
include national and local government, health, education, police,
and defence authorities. In 2016–17, the U.K. spent an estimated
£255 billion on procurement1 . Annually, in the E.U. more than
250,000 tax-funded authorities spend approx. 14% of GDP on the
public procurement of goods, services, or works2 . Public procurement represents a significant economic opportunity for businesses
that supply goods, services, or works into the public sector.
Public procurement is a regulated activity3 , with procurement
legislation aiming to ensure transparent competition among businesses competing to fulfil procurement contracts, and achieving
value for money for tax-payers. In recent years, to drive efficiency in
public procurement, many countries have adopted e-procurement4 .
One aspect of e-procurement is the publishing of a procurement
contract notice – a document that describes what goods, services,
or works, a tax-funded authority wishes to procure on the open
market. The tasks within the procurement search domain then
relate to businesses searching for relevant procurement contracts.

2

Yashar Moshfeghi

University of Strathclyde

PROCUREMENT SEARCH

Contract Notices and Awards. Within the domain of procurement search, the documents being sought fall into two main categories. First, and foremost, there are procurement contract notices
1 https://researchbriefings.files.parliament.uk/documents/SN06029/SN06029.pdf
2 ec.europa.eu/growth/single-market/public-procurement_en

3 ec.europa.eu/growth/single-market/public-procurement/rules-implementation_en

4 ec.europa.eu/growth/single-market/public-procurement/e-procurement_en

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6172-9/19/07. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331428

5 bipsolutions.com

6 trackerintelligence.com

1397

SIRIP 4: Legal IR

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

( country:104 OR country:154 OR country:21 OR country:229 OR country:164 region:5090 OR region:5097 OR region:5088 OR region:5089 OR region:5093 OR
region:5096 OR region:5092 OR region:5098 OR region:5094 OR region:5087 OR region:5086 OR region:5085) AND ( (cpvCodes:[44161200 TO 44161299] cpvCodes:[45112340 TO 45112349] cpvCodes:[45214220 TO 45214229] cpvCodes:[45231300 TO 45231399] cpvCodes:[45232130 TO 45232139] cpvCodes:[45232150
TO 45232159] cpvCodes:[45232411 TO 45232411] cpvCodes:[45232430 TO 45232439] cpvCodes:[45232431 TO 45232431] cpvCodes:[45240000 TO 45249999] ... )
OR (L8* "project evaluation" civil* "risk management" "labour market" "community engagement" "air sampling" "engineering design" pollution* "capacity
building" contaminated* "stakeholder engagement" laboratory* "water supply" environment* "plant design" employment* planning* "regeneration funding"
roads* development* "urban design" architecture* technical* structural* "older people" potable* legionella* "Carbon Capture and Storage" archaeology* "waste
management" transport* "site investigation" borehole* sewer* framework* acoustic* "face fit" marine* "building survey" biodiversity* BREEAM* water* ... ))

Figure 1: An example complex Boolean query, for the domain of public procurement contract search, where Q = (filters) AND
((cpvcodes) OR (keywords)). The complex query is manually curated by business customers, with assistance from BiP Solutions.
(i.e. time and money). While there are some similarities to other
professional search tasks, it is currently unclear if procurement
contracts search is precision or recall oriented. However, it is certainly a value-oriented task, as the user is seeking opportunities
that are relevant and valuable to their organisation. Unlike the other
domains, the value of the contracts can be clearly expressed (i.e. in
terms of profit) and so the potential costs/benefits are more salient.

3

Data and Test Collections. Within the domain of procurement
contract search, there are a number of algorithmic challenges due
to data sparsity. Typically we observe substantially lower click
volumes than with commercial web search engines, and asking
customers for explicit relevance feedback (e.g. relevance assessments) can be burdensome (especially for paying customers). This
limits how much can be learned from customer interactions, how
effectively the algorithms can be personalized, and can be an issue
when training supervised learning-to-rank techniques.
Finally, a further issue is a lack of publicly available test collections within the procurement search domain, on which to test the
effectiveness of different algorithms. In the future, we plan to develop and release a test collection (which is sufficiently anonymised)
so that more researchers and practitioners in the IR community can
investigate this important professional search task.
Bias and Regulations. A higher order challenge is the regulatory requirements to ensure that the systems are not biased – such
that certain users are given preferential treatment over others – in
the sense that they are recommended the more lucrative contracts
while other users are not. This creates a tension between personalization and the fairness of the system – as the machine learning
algorithms may encode biases due to interaction. As such a major
challenge is to ensure that all opportunities are as accessible as
possible, and that the system or the interface does not preclude
users from accessing content, and the “personalization” that is being
applied is clearly explained, justified and controllable.

CHALLENGES IN PROCUREMENT SEARCH

Query Specification. At BiP Solutions, procurement search queries
are user-curated complex Boolean expressions, often many hundreds of terms in length. An example procurement search query
is shown in Figure 1 (illustrated in Lucene query syntax). From
Figure 1, we observe that such queries are defined as: Q = filters
AND (cpvcodes OR keywords). The ‘filters” component of the query
is used to specify the contract delivery location(s) that are relevant
to the business conducting the procurement contract search, such
as country or region. The “cpvcodes” component specifies entries
from the Common Procurement Vocabulary7 (CPV), an EU-wide
procurement classification system used to assign numerical codes
to represent the goods, services, or works subject to procurement
(contracts are tagged with CPV codes). The “keywords” component
contains natural language search terms (i.e. keywords), which are
intended to identify relevant business opportunities.
Commercial & Temporal Relevance. Given the customer’s
query, there is a further layer of business and commercial factors
influencing relevance within the procurement search domain. For
example, is a business able to supply goods or services into a specific
geographical region, is the business likely to win public sector
contracts (based on trading history), can the business manufacture
the goods required or provide the specified services, and can the
business ship the required number of units to fulfil the contract
requirements. The most topically relevant contract may not be
commercially relevant due to these query independent factors.
Further, within the procurement contracts search domain, there
is an inherent temporal nature to the task. Contracts are published
with bid submission deadlines, e.g. 30 days. A procurement contract
that matches the user’s query, but has expired, is non-relevant. A
procurement contract notice that is about to expire may be topically
relevant to a user’s query, but is of limited commercial value at that
point as submitting a bid requires extensive documentation to be
prepared. Ideally, a business will be able to find or be recommended
a procurement contract as soon as it is published.

4

SUMMARY

In summary, procurement search is a professional search task that
has not yet attracted much attention within the Information Retrieval community. During this talk, we will provide an overview
of the task and the related challenges to bring attention to this area
– which unlike other search tasks has clear financial and economic
implications for businesses searching for new opportunities.
Acknowledgement: The collaboration between BiP and the
University of Strathclyde is supported by Innovate UK (KTP 11464).

REFERENCES
[1] Tony Russell-Rose, Jon Chamberlain, and Leif Azzopardi. 2018. Information
Retrieval in the Workplace: A Comparison of Professional Search Practices. Information Processing & Management 54, 6 (2018).
[2] John Tait. 2014. An Introduction to Professional Search. In Professional Search in
the Modern World. LNCS, Vol. 8830. Springer.
[3] Suzan Verberne, Jiyin He, Udo Kruschwitz, Gineke Wiggers, Birger Larsen, Tony
Russell-Rose, and Arjen P. de Vries. 2018. First International Workshop on Professional Search. SIGIR Forum 52, 2 (2018).

7 simap.ted.europa.eu/web/simap/cpv

1398

