Demonstration Paper

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

A Task-oriented Search Engine for Evidence-based Medicine
Bevan Koopman

CSIRO
Brisbane, Australia
bevan.koopman@csiro.au

Guido Zuccon

Queensland University of Technology
Brisbane, Australia
g.zuccon@qut.edu.au

Jack Russell∗

CSIRO
Brisbane, Australia
jackrussell1996@gmail.com

ABSTRACT

2.1

Evidence-based medicine (EBM) is the practice of making clinical
decisions based on rigorous scientific evidence. EBM relies on
effective access to peer-reviewed literature — a task hampered
by both the exponential growth of medical literature and a lack
of efficient and effective means of searching and presenting this
literature. This paper describes a search engine specifically designed
for searching medical literature for the purpose of EBM and in a
clinical decision support setting.

In the indexing phase, medical articles are fed to a task extraction
process that annotates mentions of diagnoses, tests and treatments.
Task extraction is achieved by first identifying mentions of medical
concepts using a medical information extraction system [13]. The
identified medical concepts are then mapped to higher level semantic types (e.g., the concept “Headache” belongs to the semantic type
“Sign or Symptom”). Each semantic type can then be mapped to one
of the three clinical tasks, diagnosis, treatment or test, by consulting
the i2b2 challenge guidelines [15] which define a mapping between
semantic types and clinical tasks. Once the tasks are identified, the
original span of text from the article is annotated with details of the
task type. A sample text, with annotated spans, is shown in Figure 2.
The resulting annotated articles are indexed into an inverted index
with separate fields for diagnoses, tests and treatments.

CCS CONCEPTS
•Information systems → Expert search;

1

PROBLEM AND TARGET USERS

While there are mature resources for searching medical literature
(PubMed being a widely used example), these are primarily focused
on retrieving literature for research purposes, not for clinical decision support. Research on how clinicians (doctors, nurses or other
health professionals) search in a clinical decision support setting [2]
has shown that clinicians pose queries within three common clinical tasks: i) searching for diagnoses given a list of symptoms;
ii) searching for relevant tests given a patient’s situation; and iii)
searching for the effective treatments given a particular condition.
An effective search engine should facilitate interactions that support these three tasks. Doing so would lead to improved retrieval
effectiveness and a more economic interaction with the search
engine and, ultimately, improved clinical decisions for patients.

2

2.2

Task-oriented retrieval

When a clinician poses a clinical query, they would typically be
provided with a long list of search results. In the task-oriented
approach, it is desirable to provide the clinician with a summary of
the significant diagnoses, tests and treatments. This allows them
to quickly gain an understanding of what they might expect to
find when examining the search results. In addition, when these
summaries are interactive (e.g., the searcher can drill-down on
specific tests or treatments) then they are provided with an easy
mechanism to navigate the information space. To facilitate such
interactions we implement the following retrieval strategy. Given
a set of search results, we estimate significant diagnoses, tests and
treatments. This is done by scoring each mention of a diagnosis,
test or treatment (which can comprise of more than one terms)
according to its frequency of appearance within the set of search
results (foreground probability) vs. the frequency it appears within
the collection as a whole (background probability).1 The top five
diagnoses, tests and treatments are displayed to the searcher (along
with the regular search results for that query). Given an individual
document within the search results, we also estimate the significant
diagnoses, tests and treatments in that document according to IDF
and display those to the user. As the underlying retrieval model,
we adopted the default Elasticsearch BM25 model.

TASK-BASED SEARCH ENGINE FOR
EVIDENCE BASED MEDICINE

A task-oriented approach is at the core of our proposed search
engine. Document representation, the retrieval method, and how
results are presented to the user are all centred around the three
tasks of diagnosis, test and treatment. Figure 1 shows the overall
architecture of the system, which was developed using Elasticsearch.
We detail the indexing, retrieval and visualisation components in
the following sub-sections.
∗ Student

Task-oriented indexing

internship while studying at Southern Cross University.

2.3

Task-oriented visualisation of results

A web-based interface provides the clinician with a means to search
and interact with results. A screenshot of the user interface, presenting the results of a search for ‘malaria’, is shown in Figure 3. The
interface provides a single input box where clinicians can enter a
free text, keyword query. Retrieval results are displayed as a ranked

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR'17, August 7–11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan
© 2017 ACM. 978-1-4503-5022-8/17/08. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3077136.3084136

1 Details

1329

on this scoring method can be found in [6].

Indexing

Demonstration Paper

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Medical articles

Annotated medical
articles
Task extraction

Diagnoses
Diagnoses

Tests

Task-oriented
indexing of articles

Treatments

Retrieval

User Interface

Task-oriented retrieval

Field-based
inverted file index

Significant concept
estimation

Clinician searcher

Figure 1: Overview of the task-oriented search approach.
Patients with a <test UMLSid="C2238079" title="blood smear">blood smear</test> found to be positive for <diagnosis
UMLSid="C0024530" title="malaria [disease/finding]">malaria</diagnosis> were often administered <treatment UMLSid="C0034414"
title="quinidine [chemical/ingredient]">quinidine</treatment>.

Figure 2: Text containing three task annotations: a test (“blood smear”), a diagnosis (“malaria”) and a treatment (“quinidine”).
list in decreasing order of relevance. Each result is comprised of
the article title, journal title, publication date and a snippet.2
Three barplots provide an overview of the significant diagnoses
(red), tests (orange) and treatments (green). These plots are interactive: clinicians can click on a particular diagnosis, for example,
and the set of search results would be filtered to include only articles mentioning that diagnosis; multiple filters can be applied.
The purpose of this interface was to allow the clinicians to, firstly,
easily get an overview of the search results by inspecting the plots
and, secondly, easily navigate the set of search results by applying
various filters.
The clinician can view an article by clicking on its title. This
opens a dialog displaying the full-text of the article with appropriate
annotation displayed. A screenshot for a sample article showing
the annotated diagnoses and treatments is shown in Figure 4.

faceted retrieval, which has shown benefits in general web search,
can improve search for EBM (Section 3.2).
The importance of access to biomedical literature has resulted
in many biomedical-specific retrieval systems [4]. While some
systems mention different types of clinical queries (e.g., therapy,
diagnosis, harm and prognosis) they typically did not integrate
these into the retrieval method or in the way the searcher was
presented with or interacted with the search results. Our system
uses the clinical tasks as the bases for both retrieval and interaction. Finally, most methods for searching EBM resources were for
research purposes, rather than clinical decision support. As such,
recall was an important factor (i.e., finding all the relevant articles
for a particular information need). In contrast, for clinical decision
support, precision can be more important (i.e., finding the article
that helps with the clinical task without reading many irrelevant
articles). Our system bases the design of the IR system around
improving precision via task-based filtering.
Some IR systems use diagnosis, test and treatment information
as features in a retrieval model. A common approach here is to
map all queries and documents being searched to medical concepts
according to an external domain-knowledge resource; matching is
then done at the concept level, comparing a query concept with
a document concept [9, 10, 14]. Although concept retrieval using
tasks has proved effective, the tasks were simply used as features
within the retrieval model and never exposed to the clinician [9, 10].
In this study, we attempt to make the task-based information explicit
in the way the clinician interacts with the system, as well as the
basis for the underlying retrieval model.
In summary, while other studies attempt to extract detailed,
structured information from medical articles, we adopt a lightweight approach by considering only diagnoses, tests and treatments. These three tasks were treated in a facet-based approach,
which has proved effective in improving search interactions in
other domains. The tasks-oriented information is used not only as

3 COMPARISON WITH EXISTING METHODS
3.1 Qualitative comparison to other systems
While research on how clinicians search indicates that they pose
queries according to three mains tasks (diagnoses, tests and treatment) [2], most systems for searching EBM resources do not take
these tasks into account. However, structuring IR systems around
different categories of information is a common approach in IR
— generally referred to as faceted retrieval [3]. Faceted retrieval
reduces mental workload by promoting recognition over recall
and by suggesting logical yet unexpected navigation paths to the
user [16]. Meaningful facets have been found to support learning,
reflection, discovery and information finding [8, 12, 16]. EBM-based
search can be viewed as a complex search task [7]: clinicians have
complex information needs and are often time pressured. Thus,
an IR approach such as faceted retrieval, which reduces mental
overhead, is desirable. In this paper, we test the hypothesis that
2 We

used the default snippet generation provided by Elasticsearch.

1330

Demonstration Paper

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Figure 3: Screenshot showing the results of a search for ‘malaria’. Three barplots provide an overview of the significant diagnoses (red), tests (orange) and treatments (green). Individual search results are shown below the barplots.

Figure 4: An sample medical article from the user interface showing annotated diagnoses (red) and treatments (green).

1331

Demonstration Paper

SIGIR’17, August 7-11, 2017, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan

Table 1: Retrieval results for task-oriented search. All results showed statistical significance over ‘No filter’ baseline
(paired t test, p < 0.01).
Task-oriented
ing
No filter
Diagnoses
Tests
Treatments

filter-

Prec.@10 (%∆)

Recip. rank (%∆)

0.2867
0.3250 (+13%)
0.3283 (+15%)
0.3167 (+10%)

0.4349
0.5271 (+21%)
0.5324 (+22%)
0.5113 (+16%)

of the system is with real users, especially given the specialist
domain of medical search. An A/B test with and without taskoriented filtering is planned to evaluate the system with real users.
In the current system, users explicitly initiate a search by entering ad-hoc queries via a free-text input box. However, in clinical
practice there are situations where a search may be implicitly initiated by a user. A common scenario for this is when a clinician
opens an electronic patient record — an effective system would
retrieve relevant diagnosis, test or treatment oriented results based
on the contents of the patient record. While the current system supports retrieval of such results, the process of generating an effective
query from a verbose patient record is needed. Initial research on
automatically generating clinical queries is underway [5].
Clinical practice that is informed by scientific evidence is known
to improve quality of care [1]. A common means of integrating this
evidence-based approach into clinical practice is through clinical
decision support systems, which are also known to improve quality of care [11]. The system we describe in this paper provides a
means for clinicians to access evidence-based literature in a clinical
decision support setting. Improvements in retrieval effectiveness using task-based filters equate to improved access to evidence-based
medicine resources. Coupled with the cost savings of using the
system, there are good indications that the use of the system can
lead to improved clinical decisions and, ultimately, patient care.

a feature in retrieval but also as a means for improving the way
clinicians might interact with the system.

3.2

Empirical evaluation of task-based filters

The task-oriented system was evaluated using the TREC Clinical
Decision Support (CDS) test collection. Retrieval effectiveness of
the system without filtering was compared with that of the system
with a specific task filter. To evaluate the effectiveness of task-based
filtering we conducted the following experiment. First, we issued
each TREC CDS query topic to the retrieval system and, with no
filtering, evaluated the corresponding precision @ 10 and mean
reciprocal rank. We then simulated the clinician interacting with
the results by selecting individual diagnoses, tests and treatments
as filters. Specifically, we filtered the search results, one at a time,
by each of the top-five diagnoses, tests and treatments; for example,
filter with only the first treatment and evaluate the results, then
filter with only the second treatment and evaluate the results, etc.
Evaluation measures were calculated after each filter had been
applied. Thus, the change in effectiveness between the first (‘no
filter’) search and each of the subsequent task-oriented searches
could be calculated. The retrieval effectiveness of the three different
task types could be compared and contrasted.
The retrieval effectiveness are shown in Table 1. The results
show that task-oriented filtering led to a statistically significant
improvement in precision @ 10 and mean reciprocal rank. Filtering
on tests exhibited the greatest improvement, followed by filtering
on diagnosis and, finally, filtering on treatments.

4

REFERENCES
[1] David M Eddy and John Billings. 1988. The quality of medical evidence: implications for quality of care. Health Affairs 7, 1 (1988), 19–32.
[2] J.W. Ely, J.A. Osheroff, P.N. Gorman, M.H. Ebell, M.L. Chambliss, E.A. Pifer, and
P.Z. Stavri. 2000. A taxonomy of generic clinical questions: classification study.
British Medical Journal 321, 7258 (2000), 429–432.
[3] Marti Hearst, Ame Elliott, Jennifer English, Rashmi Sinha, Kirsten Swearingen,
and Ka-Ping Yee. 2002. Finding the Flow in Web Site Search. Commun. ACM 45,
9 (2002), 42–49.
[4] William Hersh. 2009. Information retrieval: a health and biomedical perspective
(3rd ed.). Springer Verlag, New York.
[5] Bevan Koopman, Liam Cripwell, and Guido Zuccon. 2017. Generating Clinical
Queries from Patient Narratives: A Comparison between Machines and Humans.
In SIGIR. Tokyo, Japan.
[6] Bevan Koopman, Jack Russell, and Guido Zuccon. 2017. Task-oriented search
for evidence-based medicine. Inter. Journal of Digital Libraries (2017), 1–13.
[7] Bevan Koopman and Guido Zuccon. 2014. Why Assessing Relevance in Medical
IR is Demanding. In MedIR, SIGIR. Gold Coast, Australia.
[8] Barbara H Kwasnik. 2000. The role of classification in knowledge representation
and discovery. Library trends 48, 1 (2000).
[9] Nut Limsopatham, Craig Macdonald, and Iadh Ounis. 2013. A Task-Specific
Query and Document Representation for Medical Records Search. In ECIR.
Moscow, Russia.
[10] Zhenyu Liu and Wesley W. Chu. 2007. Knowledge-based query expansion to
support scenario-specific retrieval of medical free text. Information Retrieval 10,
2 (2007), 173–202.
[11] E. V. Murphy. 2014. Clinical decision support: effectiveness in improving quality
processes and clinical outcomes and factors that may influence success. Yale J
Biol Med 87, 2 (Jun 2014), 187–197.
[12] Dagobert Soergel. 1999. The rise of ontologies or the reinvention of classification.
JASIST 50, 12 (1999), 1119.
[13] Luca Soldaini and Nazli Goharian. 2016. QuickUMLS: a fast, unsupervised
approach for medical concept extraction. In SIGIR MedIR Workshop.
[14] Dolf Trieschnigg, Djoerd Hiemstra, Franciska de Jong, and Wessel Kraaij. 2010.
A cross-lingual framework for monolingual biomedical information retrieval. In
CIKM. ACM, 169–178.
[15] Özlem Uzuner, Brett R South, Shuying Shen, and Scott L DuVall. 2011. 2010
i2b2/VA challenge on concepts, assertions, and relations in clinical text. JASIST
18, 5 (2011), 552–556.
[16] Ryen W White. 2016. Interactions with search systems. Cambridge University
Press.

IMPACT AND OUTLOOK

An important consideration for clinicians, who are often timepressured, is any labour saving benefits that a system can provide.
As well as improving retrieval effectiveness, our system can help
reduce work load. Specifically, task-based filtering reduces the
number of documents the clinician needs to view. A more detailed
economic analysis, simulating a user applying various task-based
filters, revealed cost savings when compared to not filtering [6].
Plainly put, the cost of choosing and applying a task-based filter is
far less than reading even a single non relevant document. Thus,
even for the same retrieval effectiveness, viewing less document
offers benefits to clinicians.
Search engines for evidence-based medicine may particularly
benefit junior doctors, who are still coming to grips with a large
and evolving body of medical literature. It is this cohort of users
that we hope to recruit as users of the system. While the empirical
evaluation has shown improvements in retrieval effectiveness and
cost savings in using the task-based system, the ultimate evaluation

1332

