TweetMogaz: A News Portal of Tweets
Walid Magdy
Qatar Computing Research Institute
Qatar Foundation
Doha, Qatar

wmagdy@qf.org.qa
In this demonstration we present a news portal website,
TweetMogaz, which is generated from tweets. TweetMogaz
presents the most popular content people share on Twitter regarding
the ongoing news in different regions. Visitors of the website can
see a comprehensive report of the most popular tweets, jokes,
videos, images, and news articles that people share on Twitter
related to the top news stories of the day. Standard news sites give
their visitors an idea about what is happening in given regions,
while TweetMogaz gives visitors an idea about what are the topics
in news that people are interested in, and how they react towards
them. In addition, it captures additional aspects of news stories
shared on social media that may not exist in the news sites.
TweetMogaz applies microblog filtering technique for retrieving
tweets. A set of key players in news for a certain region are
manually listed, and one or multiple news sites for the same region
are set to our system. Potential relevant tweets to news are retrieved;
then a relevance classification technique is used to identify the
relevant tweets and discard the rest. Classified relevant tweets are
then used to generate comprehensive report with most popular
content people share as in [3]. Information on website is updated
every 15 minutes to keep following fresh news and their response
on social media.
Our approach for retrieving and filtering relevant tweets shows
high performance. The approach is applied to follow political news
in counties in the Arabic region such as the Egypt and Syria.
However, it is potentially applicable to different regions and
different news categories. The only requirement is preparing a list
of key players of a news category in a given region and setting a
regional news site.

ABSTRACT
Twitter is currently one of the largest social hubs for users to
spread and discuss news. For most of the top news stories
happening, there are corresponding discussions on social media.
In this demonstration TweetMogaz is presented, which is a
platform for microblog search and filtering. It creates a real-time
comprehensive report about what people discuss and share around
news happening in certain regions. TweetMogaz reports the most
popular tweets, jokes, videos, images, and news articles that
people share about top news stories. Moreover, it allows users to
search for specific topics. A scalable automatic technique for
microblog filtering is used to obtain relevant tweets to a certain
news category in a region. TweetMogaz.com demonstrates the
effectiveness of our filtering technique for reporting public
response toward news in different Arabic regions including Egypt
and Syria in real-time.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Information filtering.

Keywords
Twitter, Microblog Filtering, TweetMogaz, Arabic text.

1. INTRODUCTION
Microblogging sites, such as Twitter, are currently one of the
main platforms for exchanging real-time information and
discussions. In fact, Twitter and Facebook were instrumental in
facilitating the launch of the so-called “Arab Spring”. This large
amount of information led to the need for an effective platform for
information filtering, to allow only relevant information reaches
users. The currently implemented and straightforward microblog
filtering technique on Twitter is the “follow” feature. This allows
users to follow other accounts of entities, persons, or events to be
fed with their tweets. This method is personalized according to
user’s interest. Another method for following specific micrblogs
on Twitter is searching for given hashtags (#tags), which is a
common way for users to get updates about some topics based on
the mention of the hashtag within tweets text. This method is less
strict in filtering information, where more tweets are generally
presented to user. However, many unneeded tweets would be
retrieved because of the misusage of hashtags by some users.
Additionally, many relevant tweets to a hashtag topic may not
include the hashtag itself, which leads to their absence in the
retrieved results.

2. RELATED WORK
Previous work in Microblog retrieval focused on analyzing the
search process [4, 8], improving ad-hoc microblog search [6], and
developing platforms for improved user experience with search
through analyzing results [3, 9]. Additional work studied the role of
micrblogs in news reporting and discovery, and how users’ profiles
can be used for news recommendation [5, 7]. Other work
investigated detecting comments about news from Twitter to be
presented to readers along with news articles [2].
Recently, microblog filtering grabbed some attention as an
important task for allowing users to follow certain topics. Microblog
filtering was introduced as a new task in TREC Microblog track
2012, where the aim was to filter a feed of tweets by getting
relevant ones to some topics. The best achieved result in the track
got a precision of 0.6, which is considerably low for usage in a
practical environment [6].
Our system presented in this demonstration applies microblog
filtering [6] for getting tweets relevant to regional news [5, 7] in a
practical environment with high precision. Search results are
presented to user in the form of a comprehensive report [3]. Our
system enables user to get a summary about the public response
towards ongoing news [2].

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07.

1095

3. MICROBLOG FILTERING APPROACH

Predefined
Queries

Our filtering approach for retrieving relevant tweets to regional
news is shown in Figure 1. The approach is decomposed into the
following steps:

News RSS Feed

Retrieve Matching
Microblogs

1. Retrieving initial set of relevant tweets
Any region has a set of key players who are expected to be a
usual actor in news headlines. For example, “Obama” is a key
player in US politics. These set of key players are nearly static,
where they do not change frequently by time. Therefore, we
prepare a list of accurate predefined queries representing key
player in a certain region to retrieve an initial set of relevant
tweets. Queries include politicians, parties, institutes … etc, and
their corresponding Twitter accounts. The list of queries requires
updating each few months or years according to changes in the
region. These queries are set carefully to achieve high precision to
avoid the retrieval of irrelevant tweets. For example, setting a
query “Obama” referring to the US president is acceptable, since
most of the tweets talking about “Obama” refer to the president
himself. While searching for “Clinton” as a query for “Bill
Clinton” can lead to the retrieval of a large number of irrelevant
tweets for those tweets referring to “Hillary Clinton”. Therefore,
in the latter case, it is better to have the query as “Bill Clinton” to
emphasis on high precision results.
Stream of tweets that match any of the predefined queries are
considered relevant. Matching tweets are referred to as Key
Players Tweets set (TweetsKP).

List of
Relevant
Microblogs

Stream of
Microblogs

Extract Keywords
Retrieve Matching
Microblogs

Extract Random

Train Classifier

List of
Random
Microblogs

Classification
Model

Considered Relevant
Considered Irrelevant (TweetsN)
Mix of Rel. & Irrel.(TweetsKW)

List of
Matching
Microblogs

Classify

Additional
List of
Relevant
Microblogs

Figure 1 Filtering Approach for Relevant Tweets

4. TWEETMOGAZ DEMONSTRATION
TweetMogaz is running over a collection of Arabic tweets. It
collects an average of 3-4 million Arabic tweets per day since
May 2012. Tweets text is pre-processed using state-of-the-art
normalization techniques for social Arabic text [1] and indexed
using Solr. Search is enabled by specifying a query and time span,
and results are presented in a comprehensive report similar to
work in [3]. The homepage of TweetMogaz displays a real-time
report about political news in the past 24 hours for countries in the
Arabic region including Egypt and Syria. Tens of thousands of
tweets are identified daily as relevant to each region using the
presented filtering approach. The number of relevant tweets can
reach up to 300k tweets on days with hot news, such as the
Egyptian presidential elections day, and the days when there are
severe battles between the Syrian free army and the regime’s
army. User can see examples of these days by browsing archived
daily reports on the website.

2. Retrieving set of Potential Relevant Tweets
Tweets about accidental regional news may not be captured
with the set of predefined queries. To overcome this problem,
news is explored on one or more news sites, and keywords are
extracted. Keywords usually exist in news articles as metadata.
Collected keywords are then used to retrieve additional tweets.
Tweets matching keywords are then assigned to a relevance
classifier, since keywords may include general or incorrect terms
that can lead to the retrieval of large number of irrelevant tweets.
This set of tweets is referred to as Keywords Tweets (TweetsKW).

3. Classifying Tweets
An SVM classifier is trained with TweetsKP, acting as the
positive examples and a set of randomly selected tweets as
negative examples (TweetsN). TweetsN should not match neither
the predefined queries nor the extracted keywords from news.
.
This guarantees:
The number of negative examples is selected to be 10 times the
positive examples since the spectrum of irrelevant tweets is
expected to be much wider. Positive and negative examples are
selected from the past 24 hours to be representing recent data. Of
course training examples are not 100% accurate, since they are
selected automatically. However, this technique of selection is
more scalable and examples are generally correct.
The set of features used to train the SVM classifier are the terms
appearing in TweetsKP more than 10 times. In addition, a feature
represents the percentage of terms in a tweet that do not match
any of these terms is used. Generated model is then used to
classify TweetsKW. Classified relevant tweets are then added to
TweetsKP to form the full set of relevant tweets. Finally a
comprehensive report is generated out of these tweets [3].
The process of training the classifier is applied each 15 minutes
to keep the user updated with tweets relevant to news in real-time.
Typically, the tweets classified as relevant enrich the total number
of relevant tweets significantly; especially when accidental news
occurs with new entities. Subjectively, the increase of relevant
tweets ranges between 50% and 200% according to the type of
news at that time, with noticeable high precision.

5. REFERENCES
1. K. Darwish, W. Magdy, A. Mourad (2012). Language Processing
for Arabic Microblog Retrieval. CIKM 2012
2. A. Kuthari, W. Magdy, K. Darwish, A. Mourad, A. Taei. (2013).
Detecting Comments on News Articles in Microblogs. ICWSM
2013
3. W. Magdy, A. Ali, K. Darwish (2012). A Summarization Tool for
Time-Sensitive Social Media. CIKM 2012
4. N. Naveed, T. Gottron, J. Kunegis, A. Alhadi. (2011). Searching
microblogs: coping with sparsity and document quality. CIKM
2011.
5. O. Phelan, K. McCarthy, M. Bennett, and B. Smyth. (2011).
Terms of a feather: content-based news recommendation and
discovery using twitter. ECIR 2011.
6. I. Soboroff, I. Ounis, J. Lin, I. Soboroﬀ. (2012). Overview of the
TREC-2012 Microblog Track. TREC 2012
7. I. Subasic, B. Berendt. (2011). Peddling or Creating?
Investigating the Role of Twitter in News Reporting. ECIR-2011
8. J. Teevan, D. Ramage, M. Morris. (2011). #Twittersearch: A
comparison of microblog search and web search. WSDM 2011.
9. S. R. Yerva, Z. Miklós, F. Grosan, A. Tandrau, K. Aberer. (2012).
TweetSpector: Entity-based retrieval of Tweets. SIGIR 2012

1096

