Exploiting Term Dependence while
Handling Negation in Medical Search
Nut Limsopatham1 , Craig Macdonald2 , Richard McCreadie2 , Iadh Ounis2
nutli@dcs.gla.ac.uk1 , firstname.lastname@glasgow.ac.uk2
School of Computing Science
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK

ABSTRACT

Original record

In medical records, negative qualifiers, e.g. no or without,
are commonly used by health practitioners to identify the
absence of a medical condition. Without considering whether
the term occurs in a negative or positive context, the sole
presence of a query term in a medical record is insufficient to
imply that the record is relevant to the query. In this paper,
we show how to effectively handle such negation within a
medical records information retrieval system. In particular,
we propose a term representation that tackles negated language in medical records, which is further extended by considering the dependence of negated query terms. We evaluate our negation handling technique within the search task
provided by the TREC Medical Records 2011 track. Our
results, which show a significant improvement upon a system that does not consider negated context within records,
attest the importance of handling negation.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.3.3 [Information Storage & Retrieval]: Information Search & Retrieval
General Terms: Experimentation, Performance
Keywords: Medical Retrieval, Negation, Term Dependence

Negation detection

1.

Removing stopwords
NegFlag representation

Patient reports palpitations but
does not have fever
Patient reports palpitations but
does not have fever
Patient reports palpitations fever
Patient reports palpitations n0fever

Table 1: The NegFlag process for a medical record
- italicised terms occur in a negative context.
medical records containing query terms in a negated context.
We evaluate our proposed approach using the TREC 2011
Medical Records track [6] test collection. As our results exhibit significant improvement over a baseline where negation
is not handled, we conclude that negated language should
be explicitly handled for effective medial records search.

2. THE NEGFLAG APPROACH
Our negated term representation approach, NegFlag, modifies the indexing process to distinguish between positive and
negative context terms in medical records, which are identified using the NegEx algorithm [1]. Identified negated terms
are replaced with special negated versions of those terms.
Table 1 shows how an example sentence is processed using NegFlag, such that the term ‘fever’ is replaced with its
negated version, ‘n0fever’.
Hence, given the query ‘find patient with fever’, without
NegFlag, a retrieval model might erroneously rank the original record in Table 1 highly, because it contains all of the
query terms. However, after NegFlag processing, as ‘fever’
has become ‘n0fever’, the record would not score as highly.
However, while NegFlag only helps to retrieve records containing query terms with positive contexts, it does not prevent records with the negated occurrences from being retrieved. For example, the NegFlag processed example in
Table 1 might still be retrieved for the query ‘find patient
with fever and palpitations’, when the patient is known not
to have a fever. To alleviate this, in the next section, we propose the use of term dependence to demote medical records
containing query terms within negative contexts.

INTRODUCTION

Search in the medical domain is notable for its extensive
use of negated language within medical records [2]. However, recently Koopman et al. [2] asserted that the use of
term frequency in document weighting models such as BM25
automatically alleviates the problems of negated language.
Notably, they argue that terms in negative contexts typically appear once per medical record while, in contrast,
terms indicating the presence of a medical condition (positive terms) appear frequently. In this paper, we argue that a
dedicated negation handling approach will outperform traditional retrieval models for medical domain queries. Additionally, prior works have focused almost exclusively on
negated language in queries rather than documents (e.g.
boolean retrieval models or vector negation [7]). For example, for the query ‘NOT chest pain AND shortness of breath’,
the boolean model will find documents not containing ‘chest
pain’, thereby not considering any negation occurring within
the records. Moreover, most words indicating negation (e.g.
no, not) are stopwords, which are not typically indexed [1].
To cope with negation in medical search, we propose a
two-step process: a term representation approach, NegFlag,
to facilitate the handling of negative context in medical
records; and a novel term dependence approach to demote

3. TERM DEPENDENCE FOR NEGATION
Term dependence (e.g. Markov Random Fields [4]) has
been used to improve effectiveness by scoring higher documents containing many occurrences of pairs of query terms
in close proximity. In contrast, we propose to use term dependence to demote records containing the negated form of
neighbouring terms occurring in the queries. For example,
given a query ‘chest pain’, documents containing the pair of
terms ‘n0chest n0pain’ should be demoted. To this effect,
we score medical record r for a query Q, taking negation
into account, as follows:

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’12, August 12–16, 2012, Portland, Oregon, USA.
ACM 978-1-4503-1472-5/12/08.

1065

0.505

score(r, t) −

t∈Q

X

score(r, ht1 , t2 i)

(1)

bpref

score (r, Q) =

X

ht1 ,t2 i∈Q′

There are two components in Equation (1), namely the
positive scoring of positive query terms, and the negative
term dependence score for the negated forms of the query
terms. score(r, t) is the score assigned to a query term t in
medical record r using any term weighting model, Q′ is the
set of negated forms of the positive query terms in Q, and
ht1 , t2 i is a pair of negated terms in Q′ . Two types of term
dependence are possible [4, 5]: for full dependence (FD),
ht1 , t2 i is the set that contains unordered pairs of neighbouring terms; for sequential dependence (SD), ht1 , t2 i is
the set that contains ordered pairs of neighbouring terms.
For score(r, ht1 , t2 i), we use the binomial randomness model
pBiL [5] from the Divergence from Randomness (DFR) framework to score the occurrences of a pair of terms within
window size tokens in a medical record r.

4.

NegFlag Only

0.495

NegFlag with SD
NegFlag with FD

0.49
0.485
5

10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50

window_size

Figure 1: bpref performances of the baseline and
our approach, while varying window size.
Approach
Baseline
NegFlag
NegFlag with SD
window size = 3
NegFlag with FD
window size = 3
CengageM11R3
SCAIMED7
UTDHLTCIR

QE
Bo1
Bo1
Bo1
Bo1
N/A
N/A
N/A

bpref
0.5264
0.5436
0.5420

P@10
0.6147
0.6324
0.6324

R-prec
0.4290
0.4351
0.4337

0.5433

0.6235

0.4332

0.5520
0.5520
0.5450

0.6560
0.6030
0.6030

0.4400
0.4250
0.4220

Table 2: Performances of NegFlag and negative
term dependence with QE, and the top 3 best systems from TREC 2011.

EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

We evaluate our negated term representation and the term
dependence approaches using the 34 topics from the TREC
2011 Medical Records track [6]. In this track, the task is
to identify relevant patient visits for each topic, where a
visit contains all of the medical records associated with that
patients’ admission to the hospital. For indexing and retrieval, we use Terrier1 , applying Porter’s English stemmer
and removing stopwords. The parameter-free DFR DPH
term weighting model is used to rank medical records. The
expCombSUM voting technique [3] is then used to rank visits based on the scores of their associated medical records.
The number of voting medical records is limited to 5,000 as
this was found to be effective in preliminary experiments.
We hypothesise that negation should be explicitly handled,
hence we compare our approach with a baseline where negation is not explicitly handled, as suggested in [2].
Figure 1 shows the bpref retrieval performance comparing NegFlag, as well as the SD and FD variants of term
dependence with NegFlag, and the baseline where negation
is not handled. From Figure 1, we observe that our approach employing either only NegFlag or both NegFlag and
term dependence outperforms the baseline (bpref 0.4871),
by up to 4%. Indeed, NegFlag alone markedly improves the
retrieval performance over the baseline, while term dependence for window size = 3 using either SD or FD results
in statistically significant improvements over the baseline
(paired t-test, p < 0.05).
For SD, small window sizes are more effective, but performance is generally stable across different window sizes, suggesting that the presence of negated ordered pairs anywhere
in a medical record is sufficient to ascertain if it should be
demoted. For FD, window size > 3 degrades performance
compared to NegFlag, but still outperforms the baseline.
Next, we further evaluate the effectiveness of our approach
after applying a query expansion (QE) technique (namely
DFR Bo1 from Terrier). Table 2 shows the retrieval performances (in terms of bpref, precision@10, and R-precision)
of NegFlag, with SD and FD term dependence window size
= 3 (identified best settings in Figure 1), as well as without term dependence, compared to a baseline applying only
QE. The performances of the top 3 best systems at TREC
2011 are also reported. We observe that the QE baseline
is outperformed by NegFlag for all the measures, however,
1

Baseline

0.5

the combination of term dependence and query expansion
when using NegFlag remains challenging. In addition, comparing with the best systems reported at TREC 2011, we
find that NegFlag performs better than the second ranked
group in terms of precision@10 and R-precision, while for
bpref, it is comparable with the third ranked group. Importantly, this is despite our approach not requiring any of the
domain-specific ontologies that are exploited in those systems. Overall, our results are very promising, particularly
if term dependence and query expansion can be successfully
combined in future work.

5. CONCLUSIONS
We have proposed a novel approach to handle negation in
medical search using our NegFlag term representation and
a novel use of term dependence to demote documents containing the query terms in a negative context. Our approach
is shown to be effective on the Medical Records track test
collection, across a range of window sizes. Moreover, it verifies our stance that negation should be explicitly handled in
medical search. Our proposed approach could also work with
queries that contain negative contexts; however, as the available topics in the TREC 2011 test collection do not contain
any negated terms, we leave this evaluation for future work.

6. REFERENCES
[1] W. Chapman, W. Bridewell, P. Hanbury, G. Cooper, B.
Buchanan. A simple algorithm for identifying negated
findings and diseases in discharge summaries. J. of
Biomedical Informatics, 5:301–310, 2001.
[2] B. Koopman, P. Bruza, L. Sitbon, M. Lawley. Analysis of
the effect of negation on information retrieval of medical
data. In ADCS’10.
[3] C. Macdonald, I. Ounis. Voting for candidates: adapting
data fusion techniques for an expert search task. In CIKM’06
[4] D. Metzler, W. B. Croft. A Markov random field model for
term dependencies. In SIGIR’05.
[5] J. Peng, C. Macdonald, B. He, V. Plachouras, I. Ounis.
Incorporating term dependency in the DFR framework. In
SIGIR’07.
[6] E. Voorhees, R. Tong. Overview of the TREC 2011 Medical
Records Track. In TREC’11.
[7] D. Widdows. Orthogonal negation in vector spaces for
modelling word-meanings and document retrieval. In
ACL’03.

http://terrier.org

1066

