Demonstration Papers 3: Applications

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

Event Tracker: A Text Analytics Platform for Use During
Disasters
Charles Thomas

2198970t@student.gla.ac.uk
University of Glasgow, UK

Richard McCreadie

richard.mccreadie@glasgow.ac.uk
University of Glasgow, UK

in real-time and provide assistance to the public in a quick and
effective manner.
Data posted on social media platforms regarding a disaster or
world events could potentially provide a wide range of valuable
information to emergency response services. For example, responding to cries for help, accessing first-hand observations or simply
gaining an insight into public opinions could provide an addedvalue to these agencies. However, with the wealth of information
now available, it is critical that the data can be easily visualised and
navigated, ensuring that emergency services can quickly find and
act upon key information.
There also lies potential in the connection of volunteers with formal emergency response officers during crisis situations. Systems
designed to assist emergencies services during crises face typically
a number of challenges, including a lack of coordination and communication between the officers and other formal entities as well as
an unwillingness to engage and form relationships with digital volunteer groups [19]. A successful connection with both physical and
digital volunteers could indeed aid response efforts immensely, with
a wealth of potential skills and resources becoming available [20].
A range of systems have been developed in the past with the
goal to support emergency response efforts during disasters [4].
These systems, however, have had little impact on the sector. It
has been found that reasons behind this include the insufficient
training of personnel, which require time to make adequate use of
the platforms, the lack of guidelines for their use, and apprehension
over social media trustworthiness [9].
In this paper, we propose a new system, Event Tracker, which
aims to support the monitoring and management of events during
disasters and crisis situations. The system intends to support three
primary tiers of users - emergency response officers and their teams;
physical and digital volunteers; as well as the victims during the
crisis. Indeed, we argue that emergency response agencies should
be given the tools to navigate large volumes of social media data
with ease, supported by functionalities such actionable information
feeds and criticality estimation. Moreover, volunteers should be able
to provide information directly to these response agencies, either
using their first-person knowledge of the situation, or aiding the
data navigation and highlighting specific information and relevant
details. Finally, victims during a disaster should be able to straightforwardly access advice and information from emergency services,
ensuring that they are equipped with up-to-date information that
could lead to their safety.

ABSTRACT
Emergency management organisations currently rely on a wide
range of disparate tools and technologies to support the monitoring and management of events during crisis situations. This has a
number of disadvantages, in terms of training time for new staff
members, reliance on external services, and a lack of integration
(and hence poor transfer of information) between those services.
On the other hand, Event Tracker is a new solution that aims to
provide a unified view of an event, integrating information from
emergency response officers, the public (via social media) and also
volunteers from around the world. In particular, Event Tracker provides a series of novel functionalities to realise this unified view
of the event, namely: real-time identification of critical information, automatic grouping of content by the information needs of
response officers, as well as real-time volunteers management and
communication. This is supported by an efficient and scalable backend infrastructure designed to ingest and process high-volumes of
real-time streaming data with low latency.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems → Decision support systems.

KEYWORDS
Crisis Management, Social Media, Real-time Analytics
ACM Reference Format:
Charles Thomas, Richard McCreadie, and Iadh Ounis. 2019. Event Tracker:
A Text Analytics Platform for Use During Disasters. In Proceedings of the
42nd International ACM SIGIR Conference onResearch and Development in
Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’19), July 21–25,2019, Paris, France. ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 4 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331406

1

Iadh Ounis

iadh.ounis@glasgow.ac.uk
University of Glasgow, UK

INTRODUCTION

A 68% rise in the use of social networking sites since 2005 [15]
has introduced an abundance of real-time information online. This
has enabled new ways for the public to contact response agencies
[4], and grants those in the Emergency Management sector a new
means of accessing potentially life-saving information. With a threefold increase in natural disasters over the past 35 years [11], it is
extremely important that emergency response agencies have the
tools available to ensure that they can monitor social media streams
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR ’19, July 21–25,2019, Paris, France
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6172-9/19/07. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331406

2

RELATED WORK

To-date, there have been a range of techniques and systems proposed to support crisis management. Below we provide a brief
overview of key technologies and initiatives that are relevant to
our proposed Event Tracker system.

1341

Demonstration Papers 3: Applications

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

Finding Relevant Information: A core function of any crisis
management solution is getting key information to the right people.
This is operationalised either via volunteer efforts [6] or through automatic technologies [18] for categorising and prioritising reports.
Indeed, a survey [5] of approaches identified eight dimensions of
categorisation, namely: by information provided/contained; fact vs.
subjective vs. emotional content; by information source; by credibility; by time; by location; by embedded links; or by environmental
relevance (physical, built or social). Automatic categorisation efforts
have focused on supervised learning technologies, often backed by
human annotation of crisis data [12]. Building on this work, Event
Tracker provides fully automatic real-time reports alerting that are
predicted to contain critical and actionable information, as well
as state-of-the-art content-based categorisation based on a crisis
event ontology (from TREC-IS, which we discuss below).

using only pre-trained models can lead to low accuracy. Currently,
Event Tracker relies on pre-trained classification models, however
its underlying microservice architecture is flexible and allows for
the integration of additional services like AIDR. Finally, Twitcident
is another web-based system for filtering and analysing social media data on real-world incidents, such as disasters. Similar to EAIMS,
Twitcident [1] provides incident detection and search technologies,
enabling emergency services to filter data to aid their response
efforts. However, a relatively recent study showed that Twitcident
did not provide much value to response agencies in practice, as it
could not provide early warnings regarding critical information [3].
For this reason, Event Tracker integrates criticality estimation tools
to provide real-time reporting of crucial information.

Crisis Content Processing and TREC-IS: As discussed above,
a range of automatic technologies to support crisis management
have previously been proposed. However, individually they have
had little impact on crisis management as a whole [16]. One reason
for this lack of impact is data quality [10]. To avoid a similar fate,
Event Tracker’s automatic content categorisation service targets
a crisis ontology being maintained by an active initiative, namely
TREC Incident Streams (http://trecis.org). TREC-IS is a new track at
the Text Retrieval Conference (TREC) started in 2018 and designed
to unite academia and industry around research into automatically
processing social media streams during emergency situations and
categorising information and aid requests made on social media for
emergency service operators. TREC-IS provides training datasets
for training crisis content categorisation systems, as well as an
on-going (bi-yearly) evaluation challenge aimed at increasing the
TRL of such systems.

As argued earlier, the goal of Event Tracker is to provide an integrated platform that provides both automated low-latency ingestion
and augmentation of report streams (either manually entered or
crawled from social media) with effective support tools that enable
response officers and volunteers to collaborate together to generate
a unified operational picture during an emergency. In effect, this
means that the platform must support: 1) low-level support for
different report streams (news reports, social media and manual
form-filling by call-centre operators), 2) integration of fast text
processing technologies for real-time report tagging, as well as
both 3) classical on-request information access (search and content
look-up) and 4) continuous push notification servicing.
As such, Event Tracker uses a flexible architecture as illustrated
in Figure 2. The lowest ingestion layer provides multi-stream integration, using a common data back-end to [13]. Above this sits the
augmentation layer, which enables modular and scalable integration of report tagging microservices (in this case for identification of
actionable information and information criticality analysis) using a
distributed Apache Flink back-end. The output of the augmentation
layer is then processed by the activity layer, that handles the ‘business logic’ for the application (data and user management), feeding
either persistent storage structures (a search index and database)
and/or the front-end directly via push notifications. Indeed, during
a disaster event, the volume and rate at which relevant content
that needs to be processed may vary greatly (anywhere from 10
posts/min to 4,000 posts/min [7]). Thus, the architecture behind the
Event Tracker is designed to handle high-volume streams of data.

3

Related Systems: Before discussing the design and architecture of
Event Tracker, it is worth highlighting some related systems that we
either build upon or learn from. First, EAIMS [13], was a prototype
crisis management system that aimed at exploiting social media data
to provide real-time detection of emergency events (demoed at SIGIR 2016), along with search, sentiment analysis, discussion-thread
extraction and summarisation functionalities. The main drawback
of EAIMS is that it was primarily designed only for use by high-level,
head-office, emergency response staff, in contrast to Event Tracker
that also targets volunteer groups. Twitter Moments is a relatively
new feature of the Twitter platform, added in 2015. A ‘Moment’ is a
user curated collection of Tweets, which allows users to comment
on stories, promote news or create round-ups of different world
events [2]. Twitter Moments has great potential for providing a highlevel overview of an event. However, a key downfall is that Moments
are popularity-driven, so local content such as individual calls for
help will be missed. Instead, Event Tracker relies on recall-focused
crawling in conjunction to automatic content categorisation to find
actionable information quickly and accurately. Furthermore, AIDR
is a platform developed at the Qatar Computing Research Institute
that collects and classifies crisis-related Tweets [12]. AIDR makes
use of crowdsourcing to label Tweets, which can then be used to
train an automatic classifier. This ensures that the system performs
well for each new event registered, since automatic classification

4

EVENT TRACKER ARCHITECTURE

KEY FUNCTIONALITIES

Event Tracker integrates a number of functionalities following the
design vision discussed earlier. Below, we summarise these main
functionalities.
Generating Actionable Information Feeds: As discussed above,
getting key information to the right people is crucial for a successful crisis management system, and one of the main reasons why
previous systems have failed. Event Tracker combats this by providing multiple actionable information feeds through user dashboards,
each of which is designed with a different intention of the value it
can provide to the response agencies. Figure 1 (a) pictures the Twitter Feed, a real-time, filterable collection of all data gathered across
the duration of a given crisis event. The Media Feed, displayed in

1342

Demonstration Papers 3: Applications

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

(b) Event Map

(d) Media Feed

(a) Twitter Feed

(c) Critical Feed

(e) Event Tracker Feed

Figure 1: A selection of different functionalities available on the dashboards on Event Tracker
answered quickly, increasing for example the likelihood that a victim could be assisted in time. Event Tracker aims to accomplish this
by also making use of the TREC-IS initiative to provide real-time
identification of critical information. Fast classification and text processing technologies are exploited to immediately label incoming
messages with a criticality score of low, medium, high, or critical,
which can then be displayed alongside Tweets on a user’s dashboard. Continuous push notifications servicing is also harnessed
by Event Tracker to populate the Critical Feed, pictured in Figure 1
(c), to highlight reports which are predicted to contain critical and
immediately actionable information.

Interaction Layer
Content Search

Information Feeds

Storage Layer

Critical Alerts

Response Groups

Crisis Mapping

Activity Layer
Actor System

Augmentation Layer
Augmentation Layer Actionable
Criticality
Estimation

Information
Identiﬁcation

Communicating Amongst Response Associations & Groups:
To support crisis management, there are a large number of associations that could help monitor and manage a crisis (from the Red
Cross to smaller Regional Volunteer Groups). Each event being
tracked on the system can be related to multiple response associations, each of which may provide support in different manners.
These associations can communicate through Event Tracker, using
the Event Tracker Feed (Figure 1 (e)). Members of the response teams
can use this feed to communicate directly with other response agencies, passing on any relevant information. As discussed, there has
been a lack of successful systems that integrate formal response
agencies with volunteers, and so for each event registered on Event
Tracker, an open volunteering group is created, which anyone can
join. The system can be used to increase the coordination and communication between these entities, with both volunteers on the
ground reporting information, or digital volunteers highlighting
critical reports to official response officers by embedding Tweets
into their posts.

Ingestion Layer
Uniﬁed Ingestion API

Live Feeds
Social
Media

Newswire

Data Entry

Call Centre

C&C
Terminal

Figure 2: Conceptual architecture

Figure 1 (d), extracts all media collected, enabling response officers
to, for example, assess damage during and after a disaster. Automatic content-based categorisation, through the TREC-IS initiative,
examined in Section 2, is exploited by Event Tracker to provide
emergency response agencies with a set of Tweet Category Feeds, in
an attempt to increase how quickly and accurately these agencies
can navigate the collection of data to find actionable information.
Different agencies with different motivations can customise the set
of feeds to distinctive categories such as ‘First Party Observation’
or ‘Official Reports’. Each feed on Event Tracker aims to improve
the situational awareness of the agencies, which is vital in effective
decision making in complex and dynamic environments [8].

Additional Functionalities: Along with these key functionalities,
Event Tracker provides some other features which are worth mentioning. First, we describe the Crisis mapping functionality.Figure 1
(b) pictures the Event Map module on Event Tracker, which displays
both the location of the related event and the geo-tagged Tweets
that have been collected over the duration of the crisis. As the information feeds, this aids in increasing the situational awareness of the

Criticality Alerting: Early warnings and alerts regarding critical
information posted online during a crisis situation is imperative for
a quick response from emergency services. Aid requests could be

1343

Demonstration Papers 3: Applications

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

and management of events during crisis situations. The system
leverages a flexible architecture, which is designed for low latency,
and high-volume streams of data to provide functionalities such as
actionable information feeds and criticality alerting. Event Tracker
also enables the communication between various emergency response agencies and volunteers, and provides additional functionalities such as crisis mapping and on-request information access.
In the short term, we aim to make Event Tracker available to the
participants of the TREC-IS track. In particular, due to the modular
augmentation layer Event Tracker is built upon, microservices such
as those proposed by different groups participating to the TREC-IS
track could be integrated and deployed, enabling different demonstrations to the end-users, whereby the corresponding outcomes
and effectiveness of different technologies can be evaluated and
further investigated.

response agencies. The module could be extended in the future to
display the locations of other reports, to improve data management.
Next, we describe the On-request information access functionality.
Making use of the Terrier search engine [14], Event Tracker allows
users to explore the collected data with ease. New feeds are created
on the user’s dashboard, enabling multiple searches to run concurrently. For example, emergency response agencies can make use
of this feature to discover reports relating to specific queries, such
as ‘fire’.

REFERENCES
[1] Fabian Abel, Claudia Hauff, Geert-Jan Houben, Richard Stronkman, and Ke
Tao. 2012. Twitcident: Fighting fire with information from Social Web streams.
WWW’12 - Proceedings of the 21st Annual Conference on World Wide Web Companion (04 2012). https://doi.org/10.1145/2187980.2188035
Everything you need to know about
[2] Liz Alton. 2018.
Twitter
Moments.
https://business.twitter.com/en/blog/
Everything-you-need-to-know-about-Twitter-Moments.html.
Accessed:
09.02.2019.
[3] Kees Boersma, Dominique Diks, Julie Ferguson, and Jeroen Wolbers. 2016. From
Reactive to Proactive Use of Social Media in Emergency Response: A Critical Discussion of the Twitcident Project. https://doi.org/10.4018/978-1-4666-9867-3.ch014
[4] Carlos Castillo. 2016. Big Crisis Data: Social Media in Disasters and TimeCritical Situations. Cambridge University Press.
https://doi.org/10.1017/
CBO9781316476840
[5] Carlos Castillo. 2016. Big crisis data: social media in disasters and time-critical
situations. Cambridge University Press.
[6] Lise Ann St Denis, Amanda L Hughes, and Leysia Palen. 2012. Trial by fire:
The deployment of trusted digital volunteers in the 2011 shadow lake fire. In
Proceedings of ISCRAM.
[7] R. McCreadie et al. 2016. D4.7 - Integrated Search over Social Media. Deliverable,
SUPER FP7 Project (2016).
[8] J. Harrald and T. Jefferson. 2007. Shared Situational Awareness in Emergency
Management Mitigation and Response. In 2007 40th Annual Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’07). 23–23. https://doi.org/10.1109/HICSS.
2007.481
[9] Starr Hiltz, Jane Kushma, and Linda Plotnick. 2014. Use of Social Media by U.S.
Public Sector Emergency Managers: Barriers and Wish Lists. https://doi.org/10.
13140/2.1.3122.4005
[10] Starr Roxanne Hiltz, Jane A Kushma, and Linda Plotnick. 2014. Use of Social
Media by US Public Sector Emergency Managers: Barriers and Wish Lists.. In
Proceedings of ISCRAM.
[11] Peter Hoeppe. 2015. Trends in weather related disasters - Consequences for
insurers and society. (2015).
[12] Muhammad Imran, Carlos Castillo, Ji Lucas, Patrick Meier, and Sarah Vieweg. [n.
d.]. AIDR: Artificial intelligence for disaster response. In Proceedings of WWW.
[13] Richard McCreadie, Craig Macdonald, and Iadh Ounis. 2016. EAIMS: Emergency
Analysis Identification and Management System. https://doi.org/10.1145/2911451.
2911460
[14] Iadh Ounis, Gianni Amati, Vassilis Plachouras, Ben He, Craig MacDonald, and
Christina Lioma. 2006. Terrier : A High Performance and Scalable Information
Retrieval Platform. In Proceedings of OSIR’2006.
[15] Andrew Perrin. 2015. Social Media Usage: 2005-2015. Accessed: 16.02.2019.
[16] C Reuter, G Backfried, MA Kaufhold, and F Spahr. 2018. ISCRAM turns 15: A
Trend Analysis of Social Media Papers 2004-2017. In Proceedings of ISCRAM.
[17] Andrea H Tapia, Kathleen A Moore, and Nichloas J Johnson. 2013. Beyond the
trustworthy tweet: A deeper understanding of microblogged data use by disaster
response and humanitarian relief organizations.. In Proceedings of ISCRAM.
[18] Marie Truelove, Maria Vasardani, and Stephan Winter. 2015. Towards credibility
of micro-blogs: characterising witness accounts. GeoJournal (2015).
[19] J Twigg and Irina Mosel. 2017. Emergent groups and spontaneous volunteers in urban disaster response. Environment and Urbanization 29 (08 2017),
095624781772141. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956247817721413
[20] Joshua Whittaker, Blythe McLennan, and John Handmer. 2015. A review of
informal volunteerism in emergencies and disasters: Definition, opportunities
and challenges. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 13 (2015), 358 –
368. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2015.07.010

Figure 3: Potential Tweet Category feeds on user dashboards

5

ILLUSTRATIVE USE CASES

Focussing on multiple types of users during a crisis event, Event
Tracker has several use cases. To illustrate the working of Event
Tracker, let’s consider two possible user cases. In the first use case,
consider an emergency response officer, who uses the system to
view all the actionable information feeds and navigate the incoming
reports of data. During a simulation of the 2013 Australia Bushfire
crisis, Event Tracker marked the Tweet “Horrid emergency unfolding
at #faulconbridge - fire is 50m behind #springwood shs - near hundreds of homes, norman lindsay gallery #nswfires” as a high criticality
emerging threat. Had Event Tracker been deployed over this event,
a response officer accessing this report could have contributed an
effective response. During an event, these officers may be monitoring multiple communication channels [17], which may lead to
sporadic focus on each of the information feeds. As a consequence,
some important information about tnhe event might be missed. Instead, with Event Tracker, the criticality alerting component would
notify the user with any new reports that are predicted to be of
vital importance, ensuring that the end-user can act quickly and
efficiently. As a second case, consider a volunteer on the ground
during a disaster. They could make use of Event Tracker to coordinate with response agencies to ensure that they are providing the
best help they can. They can also make reports for the response
agencies, to bring any significant information they possess to the
attention of the response officers.

6

CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we have presented Event Tracker, a modular and
extensible prototype system designed to support the monitoring

1344

