Session 1A: Learning to Rank 1

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

A General Framework for Counterfactual Learning-to-Rank
Aman Agarwal

Kenta Takatsu

Cornell University
Ithaca, NY
aman@cs.cornell.edu

Cornell University
Ithaca, NY
kt426@cornell.edu

Ivan Zaitsev

Thorsten Joachims

Cornell University
Ithaca, NY
iz44@cornell.edu

Cornell University
Ithaca, NY
tj@cs.cornell.edu

ABSTRACT

1

Implicit feedback (e.g., click, dwell time) is an attractive source
of training data for Learning-to-Rank, but its naive use leads to
learning results that are distorted by presentation bias. For the
special case of optimizing average rank for linear ranking functions, however, the recently developed SVM-PropRank method has
shown that counterfactual inference techniques can be used to
provably overcome the distorting effect of presentation bias. Going
beyond this special case, this paper provides a general and theoretically rigorous framework for counterfactual learning-to-rank
that enables unbiased training for a broad class of additive ranking metrics (e.g., Discounted Cumulative Gain (DCG)) as well as a
broad class of models (e.g., deep networks). Specifically, we derive
a relaxation for propensity-weighted rank-based metrics which
is subdifferentiable and thus suitable for gradient-based optimization. We demonstrate the effectiveness of this general approach
by instantiating two new learning methods. One is a new type of
unbiased SVM that optimizes DCG – called SVM PropDCG –, and
we show how the resulting optimization problem can be solved via
the Convex Concave Procedure (CCP). The other is Deep PropDCG,
where the ranking function can be an arbitrary deep network. In
addition to the theoretical support, we empirically find that SVM
PropDCG significantly outperforms existing linear rankers in terms
of DCG. Moreover, the ability to train non-linear ranking functions
via Deep PropDCG further improves performance.

Implicit feedback from user behavior is an attractive source of data
in many information retrieval (IR) systems, especially ranking applications where collecting relevance annotations from experts can be
economically infeasible or even impossible (e.g., personal collection
search, intranet search, scholarly search). While implicit feedback
is often abundant, cheap, timely, user-centric, and routinely logged,
it suffers from inherent biases. For example, the position of a result
in a search ranking strongly affects how likely it is to be seen by a
user and thus clicked. So, naively using click data as a relevance
signal leads to sub-optimal performance.
A counterfactual inference approach for learning-to-rank (LTR)
from logged implicit feedback was recently developed to deal with
such biases [15]. This method provides a rigorous approach to unbiased learning despite biased data and overcomes the limitations
of alternative bias-mitigation strategies. In particular, it does not
require the same query to be seen multiple times as necessary for
most generative click models, and it does not introduce alternate biases like treating clicks as preferences between clicked and skipped
documents.
The key technique in counterfactual learning is to incorporate
the propensity of obtaining a particular training example into an
Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) objective that is provably unbiased [28]. While it was shown that this is possible for learning
to rank, existing theoretical support is limited to linear ranking
functions and optimizing average rank of the relevant documents
as objective [15]. In this paper, we generalize the counterfactual
LTR framework to a broad class of additive IR metrics as well as
non-linear deep models. Specifically, we show that any IR metric that is the sum of individual document relevances weighted
by some function of document rank can be directly optimized via
Propensity-Weighted ERM. Moreover, if an IR metric meets the
mild requirement that the rank weighting function is monotone,
we show that a hinge-loss upper-bounding technique enables learning of a broad class of differentiable models (e.g. deep networks).
To demonstrate the effectiveness of the general framework, we
fully develop two learning-to-rank methods that optimize the Discounted Cumulative Gain (DCG) metric. The first is SVM PropDCG,
which generalizes a Ranking SVM to directly optimize a bound on
DCG from biased click data. The resulting optimization problem is
no longer convex, and we show how to find a local optimum using
the Convex Concave Procedure (CCP). In CCP, several iterations
of convex sub-problems are solved. In the case of SVM PropDCG,

KEYWORDS
Learning to rank, presentation bias, counterfactual inference
ACM Reference Format:
Aman Agarwal, Kenta Takatsu, Ivan Zaitsev, and Thorsten Joachims. 2019.
A General Framework for Counterfactual Learning-to-Rank. In Proceedings
of the 42nd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development
in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’19), July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 10 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331202
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France
© 2019 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6172-9/19/07. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3331184.3331202

5

INTRODUCTION

Session 1A: Learning to Rank 1

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

these convex sub-problems have the convenient property of being
a Quadratic Program analogous to a generalized Ranking SVM.
This allows the CCP to work by invoking an existing and fast SVM
solver in each iteration until convergence. The second method we
develop is Deep PropDCG, which further generalizes the approach
to deep networks as non-linear ranking functions. Deep PropDCG
also optimizes a bound on the DCG, and we show how the resulting
optimization problem can be solved via stochastic gradient descent
for any network architecture that shares neural network weights
across candidate documents for the same query.
In addition to the theoretical derivation and the justification, we
also empirically evaluate the effectiveness of both SVM PropDCG
and Deep PropDCG, especially in comparison to the existing SVM
PropRank method [15]. We find that SVM PropDCG performs significantly better than SVM PropRank in terms of DCG, and that it
is robust to varying degrees of bias, noise and propensity-model
misspecification. In our experiments, CCP convergence was typically achieved quickly within three to five iterations. For Deep
PropDCG, the results show that DCG performance is further improved compared to SVM PropDCG when using a neural network,
thus demonstrating that the counterfactual learning approach can
effectively train non-linear ranking functions. SVM PropDCG and
Deep PropDCG are also seen to outperform LambdaRank in terms
of DCG.

2

Metric

λ (rank)

AvдRank
DCG
Prec@k
RBP-p [20]

rank
−1/log(1 + rank)
−1rank≤k /k
−(1 − p)/p rank

Table 1: Some popular linearly decomposable IR metrics
that can be directly optimized by Propensity-Weighted ERM.
λ (r ) is the rank weighting function.

the propensity estimation step.
While our focus is on directly optimizing ranking performance
in the implicit feedback partial-information setting, several approaches have been proposed for the same task in the full-information
supervised setting, i.e. when the relevances of all the documents
in the training set are known. A common strategy is to use some
smoothed version of the ranking metric for optimization, as seen
in SoftRank [30] and others [6, 14, 35, 36]. In particular, SoftRank
optimizes the expected performance metric over the distribution of
rankings induced by smoothed scores, which come from a normal
distribution centered at the query-document mean scores predicted
by a neural net. This procedure is computationally expensive with
an O(n 3 ) dependence on the number of documents for a query.
In contrast, our approach employs an upper bound on the performance metric, whose structure makes it amenable to the Convex
Concave Procedure for efficient optimization, as well as adaptable
to non-linear ranking functions via deep networks.
Finally, several works exist [4, 5, 23, 30] that have proposed
neural network architectures for learning-to-rank. We do not focus
on a specific network architecture in this paper, but instead propose
a new training criterion for learning-to-rank from implicit feedback
that in principle allows unbiased network training for a large class
of architectures.

RELATED WORK

Generative click models are a popular approach for explaining the
bias in user behavior and for extracting relevance labels for learning.
For example, in the cascade model [9] users are assumed to sequentially go down a ranking and click on a document, thus revealing
preferences between clicked and skipped documents. Learning from
these relative preferences lowers the impact of some biases [13].
Other click models ([3, 7, 9], also see [8]) train to maximize loglikelihood of observed clicks, where relevance is modeled as a latent
variable that is inferred over multiple instances of the same query.
In contrast, the counterfactual framework [15] does not require
latent-variable inference and repeat queries, but allows directly incorporating click feedback into the learning-to-rank algorithm in a
principled and unbiased way, thus allowing the direct optimization
of ranking performance over the natural query distribution.
The counterfactual approach uses inverse propensity score (IPS)
weighting, originally employed in survey sampling [11] and causal
inference from observational studies [24], but more recently also in
whole page optimization [34], IR evaluation with manual judgments
[25], and recommender evaluation [17, 26]. This approach is similar
in spirit to [32], where propensity-weighting is used to correct
for selection bias when discarding queries without clicks during
learning-to-rank.
Recently, inspired by the IPS correction approach for unbiased
LTR, some algorithms (Ai et al. [2], Hu et al. [12]) have been proposed that jointly estimate the propensities and learn the ranking
function. However, this requires an accurate relevance model to
succeed, which is at least as hard as the LTR from biased feedback
problem in question. Moreover, the two-step approach of propensity
estimation followed by training an unbiased ranker allows direct
optimization of any chosen target ranking metric independent of

3

UNBIASED ESTIMATION OF RANK-BASED
IR METRICS

We begin by developing a counterfactual learning framework that
covers the full class of linearly decomposable metrics as defined
below (e.g. DCG). This extends [15] which was limited to the Average Rank metric. Suppose we are given a sample X of i.i.d. query
instances x i ∼ P(x), i ∈ [N ]. A query instance can include personalized and contextual information about the user in addition to
the query string. For each query instance x i , let ri (y) denote the
user-specific relevance of result y for instance x i . For simplicity, assume that relevances are binary, ri (y) ∈ {0, 1}. In the following, we
consider the class of additive ranking performance metrics, which
includes any metric that can be expressed as

Δ(y|x i , ri ) =
λ (rank(y|y)) · ri (y).
(1)
y ∈y

y denotes a ranking of results, and λ () can be any weighting function that depends on the rank rank(y|y) of document y in ranking y.
A broad range of commonly used ranking metrics falls into this class,
and Table 1 lists some of them. For instance, setting λ (rank) = rank
gives the sum of relevant ranks metric (also called average rank
−1
when normalized) considered in [15], and λ (rank) = log(1+rank)

6

Session 1A: Learning to Rank 1

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

gives the DCG metric. Note that we consider negative values wherever necessary to make the notation consistent with risk minimization.
A ranking system S maps a query instance x i to a ranking y.
Aggregating the losses of individual rankings over the query distribution, we can define the overall risk (e.g., the expected DCG) of a
system as

Using this unbiased estimate of the loss function, we get an
unbiased estimate of the risk of a ranking system S
R̂ I P S (S) =

=

Δ(S(x)|x, r) d P(x, r).

(2)

A key problem when working with implicit feedback data is that
we cannot assume that all relevances ri are observed. In particular,
while a click (or a sufficiently long dwell time) provides a noisy
indicator of positive relevance in the presented ranking ȳi , a missing
click does not necessarily indicate lack of relevance as the user may
not have observed that result. From a machine learning perspective,
this implies that we are in a partial-information setting, which we
will deal with by explicitly modeling missingness in addition to
relevance. Let oi ∼ P(o|x i , ȳi , ri ) denote the 0/1 vector indicating
which relevance values are revealed. While oi is not necessarily
fully observed either, we can now model its distribution, which
we will find below is sufficient for unbiased learning despite the
missing data. In particular, the propensity of observing ri (y) for
query instance x i given presented ranking ȳ is then defined as
Q(oi (y) = 1|x i , ȳi , ri ).
Using this counterfactual setup, an unbiased estimate of Δ(y|x i , ri )
for any ranking y can be obtained via IPS weighting
Δ̂I P S (y|x i , ȳi , oi ) =


y:o
 i (y)=1
ri (y)=1

λ (rank(y|y))
.
Q(oi (y) = 1|x i , ȳi , ri )

4

=

 Q(oi (y) = 1|x i , ȳi , ri ) · λ (rank(y|y)) · ri (y)
Q(oi (y) = 1|x i , ȳi , ri )
y ∈y

λ (rank(y|y)) ri (y)

=

Δ(y|x i , ri ),

=

y:o
 i (y)=1
ri (y)=1

λ (rank(y|S(x i )))
.
Q(oi (y) = 1|x i , ȳi , ri )

(5)

UNBIASED EMPIRICAL RISK
MINIMIZATION FOR LTR

The propensity-weighted empirical risk from Equation (5) can be
used to perform Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM)

Sˆ = argminS ∈S R̂ I P S (S) .
Under the standard uniform convergence conditions [31], the unbiasedness of the risk estimate implies consistency in the sense that
given enough training data, the learning algorithm is guaranteed to
find the best system in S. We have thus obtained a theoretically justified training objective for learning-to-rank with additive metrics
like DCG. However, it remains to be shown that this training objective can be implemented in efficient and practical learning methods.
This section shows that this is indeed possible for a generalization
of Ranking SVMs and for deep networks as ranking functions.
Consider a dataset of n examples of the following form. For
each query-result pair (x i , yi ) that is clicked, let qi = Q(oi (y) =
1|x i , ȳi , ri ) be the propensity of the click according to a click propensity model such as the Position-Based Model [15, 33]. We also record
the candidate set Yi of all results for query x i . Note that each click
generates a separate training example, even if multiple clicks occur
for the same query.
Given this propensity-scored click data, we would like to learn
a scoring function f (x, y). Such a scoring function f naturally
specifies a ranking system S by sorting candidate results Y for a
given query x by their scores.

(3)

This is an unbiased estimator since,
Eoi [Δ̂I P S (y|x i , ȳi , oi )]
⎡ 
⎤
⎢
λ (rank(y|y))·ri (y) ⎥⎥
= Eoi ⎢⎢
⎥
⎢y:oi (y)=1 Q(oi (y) = 1|x i , ȳi , ri ) ⎥
⎣
⎦

oi (y)·λ (rank(y|y))·ri (y)
Eoi
=
Q(oi (y) = 1|x i , ȳi , ri )
y ∈y



Note that the propensities Q(oi (y) = 1|x i , ȳi , ri ) are generally
unknown, and must be estimated based on some model of user
behavior. Practical approaches to estimating the propensities are
given in [1, 10, 15, 33].

∫
R(S)

N

1
N i=1

(4)

S f (x) ≡ argsortY { f (x, y)}

(6)

Since rank(y|S f (x)) of a result is a discontinuous step function
of the score, tractable learning algorithms typically optimize a
substitute loss that is (sub-)differentiable [13, 30, 36]. Following
this route, we now derive a tractable substitute for the empirical
risk of (5) in terms of the scoring function. This is achieved by the
following hinge-loss upper bound [15] on the rank

1f (x i ,y)−f (x i ,yi )>0
rank(yi |y) − 1 =

y ∈y

y ∈Yi
yyi

assuming Q(oi (y) = 1|x i , ȳi , ri ) > 0 for all y that are relevant
ri (y) = 1. The above proof is a generalized version of the one in [15]
for the Average Rank metric. Note that the estimator in Equation (3)
sums only over the results where the feedback is observed (i.e.,
oi (y) = 1) and positive (i.e., ri (y) = 1), which means that we do not
have to disambiguate whether lack of positive feedback (e.g., the
lack of a click) is due to a lack of relevance or due to missing the
observation (e.g., result not relevant vs. not viewed).

≤



max(1 − (f (x i , yi ) − f (x i , y)), 0).

y ∈Yi
yyi

Using this upper bound, we can also get a bound for any IR metric
that can be expressed through a monotonically increasing weighting function λ (r ) of the rank. Note that this monotonicity condition
is satisfied by all the metrics in Table 1. By rearranging terms and

7

Session 1A: Learning to Rank 1

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

applying the weighting function λ (r ), we have

Moving to the case of DCG as the training metric via the weight−1 , we get the following optimization
ing function λ (r ) = log(1+r
)
problem for SVM PropDCG

 



max(1 − (f (x i , yi ) − f (x i , y)), 0) .
λ (rank(yi |y)) ≤ λ 1 +


y ∈Yi
 yyi

This provides the following continuous and subdifferentiable upper
hinдe
bound R̂ I P S (f ) on the propensity-weighted risk estimate of (5).

s.t .

∀j∀y : ξ iy ≥ 0.

hinдe

R̂ I P S (S f ) ≤ R̂ I P S (f )

This optimization problem is no longer a convex Quadratic Program. However, all constraints are still linear inequalities in the
variables w and ξ , and the objective can be expressed as the difference of two convex functions h an д. Let h(w) = 12 w  2 and

д(ξ ) = Cn nj=1 q1i log( 1 ξ +2) . Then the function h is the L2

n


1 1  

λ 1+ max(1 − (f (x i , yi )− f (x i , y)), 0) (7)

n i=1 qi 
y ∈Yi
 yyi

Focusing on the DCG metric, we show in the following how this upper bound can be optimized for linear as well as non-linear neural
network scoring functions. For the general class of additive IR metrics, the optimization depends on the properties of the weighting
function λ (r ), and we highlight them wherever appropriate.

=

4.1

y ∈Yi

iy

norm of the vector w and is thus a convex function. As for the function д, the function k : x → log1 x is convex as it is the composition

of a a convex decreasing function (x → x1 ) with a concave function
(x → log x). So, since the sum of affine transformations of a convex
function is convex, д is convex.
Such an optimization problem is called a convex-concave problem1 and a local optimum can be obtained efficiently via the ConvexConcave Procedure (CCP) [18]. At a high level, the procedure works
by repeatedly approximating the second convex function with its
first order Taylor expansion which makes the optimization problem
convex in each iteration. The Taylor expansion is first done at some
chosen initial point in the feasible region, and then the solution of
the convex problem in a particular iteration is used as the Taylor
approximation point for the next iteration. It can be shown that
this procedure converges to a local optimum [18].
Concretely, let w k , ξ k be the solution in the k th iteration. Then,
we have the Taylor approximation

SVM PropDCG

The following derives an SVM-style method, called SVM PropDCG,
for learning a linear scoring function f (x, y) = w · ϕ(x, y), where
w is a weight vector and ϕ(x, y) is a feature vector describing the
match between query x and result y. For such linear ranking functions – which are widely used in Ranking SVMs [13] and many
other learning-to-rank methods [19] –, the propensity-weighted
ERM bound from Equation (7) can be expressed as the following
SVM-type optimization problem.
n
C  1 
1

λ
ξ iy + 1
w ·w +
2
n i=1 qi
y ∈Yi

∀y ∈ Y1 \{y1 } : w · [ϕ(x 1 , y1 ) − ϕ(x 1 , y)] ≥ 1−ξ 1y

ŵ = argminw, ξ
s.t .

n
C 1
1
1

w ·w −
2
n i=1 qi log( y ∈Yi ξ iy + 2)
∀j∀y ∈ Yi \{yi } : w · [ϕ(x i , yi ) − ϕ(x i , y)] ≥ 1−ξ iy

ŵ = argminw, ξ

д̂(ξ ; ξ k )

..
.

=

∀y ∈ Yn \{yn } : w · [ϕ(x n , yn ) − ϕ(x n , y)] ≥ 1−ξ ny
∀i∀y : ξ iy ≥ 0

= д(ξ k ) + ∇д(ξ k )T (ξ − ξ k )
n
C 1

д(ξ k ) −
n j=1 qi 



C is a regularization parameter. The training objective optimizes
the L2 -regularized hinge-loss upper bound on the empirical risk
estimate (7). This upper bound holds since for any feasible (w, ξ )
and any monotonically increasing weighting function λ (r )

Letting qi = qi



y ∈Yi



y ∈Yi

k + 2 log2
ξ iy



k
ξ iy − ξ iy



 k
2
k
ξ iy + 2 log
ξ iy + 2
y ∈Yi





y ∈Yi



y ∈Yi

k + 2 , and dropping
ξ iy

the additive constant terms from д̂, we get the following convex
program that needs to be solved in each CCP iteration.

 



λ 1 +
max(1 − (f (x i , yi ) − f (x i , y)), 0)


y ∈Yi
 yyi


n
C 1 
1
ξ iy
w ·w +
2
n i=1 qi
y ∈Yi
∀i∀y ∈ Yi \{yi } : w · [ϕ(x i , yi ) − ϕ(x i , y)] ≥ 1−ξ iy
∀i∀y : ξ iy ≥ 0

argminw, ξ

s.t .

 

 



= λ 1+
ξ iy  .
max(1 − w · [ϕ(x i , yi ) − ϕ(x i , y)], 0) ≤ λ 1+


y ∈Yi
 y ∈Yi

 yyi


Observe that this problem is of the same form as SVM PropRank, the
Propensity Ranking SVM for the average rank metric, i.e. λ (r ) = r
(with the caveat that qi are not propensities). This nifty feature
allows us to solve the convex problem in each iteration of the CCP
using the fast solver for SVM PropRank provided in [15]. In our

As shown in [15], for the special case of using the sum of relevant
ranks as the metric to optimize, i.e. λ (r ) = r , this SVM optimization problem is a convex Quadratic Program which can be solved
efficiently using standard SVM solvers, like SVM-rank [14], via a
one-slack formulation.

1 More

generally, the inequality constraints can also be convex-concave and not just
convex

8

Session 1A: Learning to Rank 1

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

experiments, CCP convergence was achieved within a few iterations – as detailed in the empirical section. For other IR metrics,
the complexity and feasibility of the above Ranking SVM optimization procedure will depend on the form of the target IR metric. In
particular, if the rank weighting function λ (r ) is convex, it may be
solved directly as a convex program. If λ (r ) is concave, then the
CCP may be employed as shown for the DCG metric above.
An attractive theoretical property of SVM-style methods is the
ability to switch from linear to non-linear functions via the Kernel
trick. In principle, kernelization can be applied to SVM PropDCG
as is evident from the representer theorem [27]. Specifically, by
taking the Lagrange dual, the problem can be kernelized analogous
to [13]. While it can be shown that the dual is convex and strong
duality holds, it is not clear that the optimization problem has
a convenient and compact form that can be efficiently solved in
practice. Even for the special case of the average rank metric, λ (r ) =
r , the associated kernel matrix Kiy, jy has a size equal to the total

number of candidates ni=1 |Yi | squared, making the kernelization
approach computationally infeasible or challenging at best. We
therefore explore a different route for extending our approach to
non-linear scoring functions in the following.

4.2

11
+
11
+
11

/
2
6
6

+
11

Figure 1: Deep PropDCG schema for computing the loss
from one query instance. The blue document is the positive
(clicked) result, and the red documents are the other candidates. The neural net NN is used to compute document
scores for each set of candidate features. Pairs of scores are
passed through the hinge node, and then finally the weighting function is applied as shown.

Deep PropDCG

for DCG, we get the Deep PropDCG minimization objective

Since moving to non-linear ranking functions through SVM kernelization is challenging, we instead explore deep networks as a class
of non-linear scoring functions. Specifically, we replace the linear
scoring function f (x, y) = w · ϕ(x, y) with a neural network
f (x, y) = N Nw [ϕ(x, y)]

Ȝ

n
 

1  −1


log−1 2+ max(1−(N Nw [ϕ(x i , yi )]−N Nw [ϕ(x i , y)]), 0)


n j=1 qi
y ∈Yi
 yyi


to which a regularization term can be added (our implementation
uses weight decay).
Since the weighting function ties together the hinge losses from
pairs of documents in a non-linear way, stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) is not directly feasible at the level of individual documents.
In the case of DCG, since the rank weighting function is concave,
one possible workaround is a Majorization-Minimization scheme
[28] (akin to CCP): upper bound the loss function with a linear
Taylor approximation at the current neural net weights, perform
SGD at the level of document pairs (yi , y) to update the weights,
and repeat until convergence.
While this Majorization-Minimization scheme in analogy to the
SVM approach is possible also for deep networks, we chose a different approach for the reasons given below. In particular, given
the success of stochastic-gradient training of deep networks in
other settings, we directly perform stochastic-gradient updates
at the level of query instances, not individual (x i , y). At the level
of query instances, the objective does decompose linearly such
that any subsample of query instances can provide an unbiased
gradient estimate. Note that this approach works for any differentiable weighting function λ (r ), does not require any alternating
approximations as in Majorization-Minimization, and processes
each candidate document y including the clicked document yi only
once in one SGD step.
For SGD at the level of query instances, a forward pass of the neural network – with the current weights fixed – must be performed
on each document y in candidate set Yi in order to compute the
loss from training instance (x i , yi ). Since the number of documents
in each candidate set varies, this is best achieved by processing

(8)

This network is generally non-linear in both the weights w and the
features ϕ(x, y). However, this does not affect the validity of the
hinge-loss upper bound from Equation (7), which now takes the
form
n


1 1  

λ 1+
max(1 − (N Nw [ϕ(x i , yi )] − N Nw [ϕ(x i , y)]), 0)

n j=1 qi 
y ∈Yi
 yyi


During training, we need to minimize this function with respect to
the network parameters w. Unlike in the case of SVM PropDCG,
this function can no longer be expressed as the difference of a convex and a concave function, since N Nw [ϕ(x i , yi )] is neither convex
nor concave in general. Nevertheless, the empirical success of optimizing non-convex N Nw [ϕ(x i , yi )] via gradient descent to a local
optimum is well documented, and we will use this approach in the
following. This is possible since the training objective is subdifferentiable as long as the weighting function λ (r ) is differentiable.
However, the non-linearity of λ (r ) adds a challenge in applying
stochastic gradient descent methods to our training objective, since
the objective no longer decomposes into a sum over all (x i , y) as
in standard network training. We discuss in the following how to
handle this situation to arrive at an efficient stochastic-gradient
procedure.
For concreteness, we again focus on the case of optimizing DCG
−1 . In particular, plugging in the weighting function
via λ (r ) = log(1+r
)

9

Session 1A: Learning to Rank 1

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

each input instance (including the corresponding candidate set)
as a (variable-length) sequence so that the neural net weights are
effectively shared across candidate documents for the same query
instance.
This process is most easily understood via the network architecture illustrated in Figure 1. The scoring function N Nw [ϕ(x i , yi )] is
replicated for each result in the candidate set using shared weights
w. In addition there is a hinge-loss node H (u, v) = max(1−(u −v), 0)
that combines the score of the clicked result with each other result
in the candidate set Yi . For each such pair (yi , y), the corresponding
hinge-loss node computes its contribution h j to the upper bound on
the rank. The result of the hinge-loss
nodes then feeds into a single

 
weighting node Λ(h) = λ 1 + j h j that computes the overall
bound on the rank and applies the weighting function. The result
is the loss of that particular query instance.
Note that we have outlined a very general method which is agnostic about the size and architecture of the neural network. As a
proof-of-concept, we achieved superior empirical results over a linear scoring function even with a simple two layer neural network,
as seen in Section 5.8. We conjecture that DCG performance may
be enhanced further with deeper, more specialized networks. Moreover, in principle, the hinge-loss nodes can be replaced with nodes
that compute any other differentiable loss function that provides
an upper bound on the rank without fundamental changes to the
SGD algorithm.

5

Dataset

# Train queries

# Features

173,986
25,870

20,274
1,484

699
46

Yahoo
LETOR4.0

Table 2: Properties of the two benchmark datasets.
Model

Avg. DCG (Yahoo)

Avg. DCG (LETOR4.0)

SVM Rank
LambdaRank
SVM PropRank
SVM PropDCG
Deep PropDCG

0.6223 ± 8e-4
0.6435 ± 4e-4
0.6410± 1e-3
0.6468± 2e-3
0.6517 ± 4e-4

0.6841 ± 2e-3
0.6915 ± 4e-3
0.7004 ± 1e-2
0.7043 ± 1e-2
0.7244 ± 4e-3

Table 3: Performance comparison of different methods on
two benchmark datasets (η = 1, ϵ− = 0.1, ϵ+ = 1).
Yahoo Learning to Rank Challenge, with only 784 queries, we follow
the data augmentation approach proposed in [21], combining the
MQ2007 and MQ2008 train sets for training and using the MQ2008
validation and test sets for validation and testing respectively.
Our experiment setup matches [15] for the sake of consistency
and reproducibility. Briefly, the training and validation click data
were generated from the respective full-information datasets (with
relevances binarized) by simulating the position-based click model.
Following [15], we use
that decay with presented rank
 propensities
η
of the result as pr = r1 . The rankings that generate the clicks are
given by a “production ranker” which was a conventional Ranking
SVM trained on 1 percent of the full-information training data.
The parameter η controls the severity of bias, with higher values
causing greater position bias.
We also introduced noise into the clicks by allowing some irrelevant documents to be clicked. Specifically, an irrelevant document
ranked at position r by the production ranker is clicked with probability pr times ϵ− . When not mentioned otherwise, we used the
parameters η = 1, ϵ− = 0.1 and ϵ+ = 1, which is consistent with
the setup used in [15]. Other bias profiles are also explored in the
following.
Both the SVM PropRank and SVM PropDCG models were trained
and cross-validated to pick the regularization constant C. For crossvalidation, we use the partial feedback data in the validation set and
select based on the IPS estimate of the DCG [29]. The performance
of the models is reported on the binarized fully labeled test set
which is never used for training or validation.

EMPIRICAL EVALUATION

While the derivation of SVM PropDCG and Deep PropDCG has
provided a theoretical justification for both methods, it still remains
to show whether this theoretical argument translates to improved
empirical performance. To this effect, the following empirical evaluation addresses three key questions.
First, we investigate whether directly optimizing DCG improves
performance as compared to baseline methods, in particular, SVM
PropRank as the most relevant method for unbiased LTR from
implicit feedback, as well as LambdaRank, a common strong nonlinear LTR method. Comparing SVM PropDCG to SVM PropRank
is particularly revealing about the importance of direct DCG optimization, since both methods are linear SVMs and employ the same
software machinery for the Quadratic Programs involved, thus eliminating any confounding factors. We also experimentally analyze
the CCP optimization procedure to see whether SVM PropDCG is
practical and efficient. Second, we explore the robustness of the
generalized counterfactual LTR approach to noisy feedback, the
severity of the presentation bias, and misspecification of the propensity model. And, finally, we compare the DCG performance of Deep
PropDCG with a simple two layer neural network against the linear
SVM PropDCG to understand to what extent non-linear models
can be trained effectively using the generalized counterfactual LTR
approach.

5.1

# Avg. train clicks

5.2

How do SVM PropDCG and Deep PropDCG
compare against baselines?

We begin the empirical evaluation by comparing our counterfactual
LTR methods again standard methods that follow a conventional
ERM approach, namely LambdaRank and SVM-Rank. We generate
synthetic click data using the procedure describe above, iterating
over the training set 10 times for the Yahoo dataset and 100 times
for MQ2008. This process was repeated over 6 independent runs,
and we report the average performance along with the standard
deviation over these runs. The regularization constant C for all
SVM methods was picked based on the average DCG performance
across the validation click data sampled over the 6 runs. Table 2

Setup

We conducted experiments on synthetic click data derived from
two major LTR datasets, the Yahoo Learning to Rank Challenge corpus and LETOR4.0 [22]. LETOR4.0 contains two separate corpora:
MQ2007 and MQ2008. Since MQ2008 is significantly smaller than

10

Session 1A: Learning to Rank 1

Avg. DCG of Relevant Results

0.65
0.64

SVM PropDCG
SVM PropRank
SVM PropDCG-5x
SVM PropRank-5x

0.7

SVM PropDCG
SVM PropRank
Noise-free Full-info Skyline
Production Ranker

Avg. DCG of Relevant Results

0.66

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

0.63
0.62
0.61
0.6
0.59
0.58

0.65

0.6

0.55

0.57
0.56
1.7E3

0.5
1.7E4
Number of Training Clicks

0

1.7E5

Avg. Rank of Relevant Results

13

2

Figure 4: Test set Avg DCG performance for SVM PropDCG
and SVM PropRank as presentation bias becomes more severe in terms of η (n = 45K and n = 225K, ϵ− = 0).

Figure 2: Test set Avg DCG performance for SVM PropDCG
and SVM PropRank (η = 1, ϵ− = 0.1)
13.5

0.5
1
1.5
Severity of Presentation Bias

SVM PropDCG
SVM PropRank
Noise-free Full-info Skyline
Production Ranker

which learns a two-layer neural network ranker. We conjecture
that more sophisticated network architectures can further improve
performance.

12.5
12

5.3
11.5

Next, we explore how the test-set ranking performance changes
as the learning algorithm is given more and more click data. The
resulting learning curves are given in Figures 2 and 3. The click data
has presentation bias with η = 1 and noise with ϵ− = 0.1. For small
datasets, results are averaged over 3 draws of the click data. Both
curves show the performance of the Production Ranker used to
generate the click data, and the SVM skyline performance trained
on the full-information training set. Ideally, rankers trained on click
data should outperform the production ranker and approach the
skyline performance.
Figure 2 shows that the DCG performance of both SVM PropDCG
and SVM PropRank. As expected, both improve with increasing
amounts of click data. Moreover, SVM PropDCG performs substantially better than the baseline SVM PropRank in maximizing test
set DCG.
More surprisingly, Figure 3 shows both methods perform comparably in minimizing the average rank metric, with SVM PropDCG
slightly better at smaller amounts of data and SVM PropRank better
at larger amounts. We conjecture that this is due the variancelimiting effect of the DCG weights in SVM PropDCG when substituting the propensity weights qi with the new constants qi in
the SVM PropDCG CCP iterations. This serves as implicit variance
control in the IPS estimator similar to clipping [15] by preventing
propensity weights from getting too big. Since variance dominates
estimation error at small amounts of data and bias dominates at
large amounts, our conjecture is consistent with the observed trend.

11
10.5
10
1.7E3

1.7E4
Number of Training Clicks

How does ranking performance scale with
training set size?

1.7E5

Figure 3: Test set Avg Rank performance for SVM PropDCG
and SVM PropRank (η = 1, ϵ− = 0.1)
shows the average number of clicks along with other information
about the training sets.
As a representative for non-linear LTR methods that use a conventional ERM approach, we also conducted experiments with
LambdaRank as one of the most popular tree-based rankers. We use
the LightGBM implementation [16]. During training, LambdaRank
optimizes Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain (NDCG). Since
LambdaRank is a full-information method, we used clicks as relevance labels, i.e. all clicked documents as relevant and all nonclicked documents as irrelevant. The hyperparameters for LambdaRank, namely learning rate and the number of leaves were tuned
based on the average DCG of clicked documents in the validation
sets. More specifically, we performed a grid search to finetune learning rate from 0.001 to 0.1 and the number of leaves from 2 to 256.
After tuning, we selected the learning rate to be 0.1, and the number of leaves to be 64 for the Yahoo dataset and 4 for MQ2008. We
also made sure each split does not use more than 50% of the input
features.
As shown in in Table 3, the counterfactual ERM approach via
IPS weighting and directly optimizing for the target metric DCG
yield superior results for SVM PropDCG and Deep PropDCG. The
best results on both benchmarks are achieved by Deep PropDCG,

5.4

How much presentation bias can be
tolerated?

We now vary the severity of the presentation bias via η – higher
values leading to click propensities more skewed to the top positions

11

Session 1A: Learning to Rank 1

SVM PropDCG
SVM PropRank

0.7
Avg. DCG of Relevant Results

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

creases. However, there is no evidence that SVM PropDCG is less
robust to noise than the baseline SVM PropRank.

0.65

5.6

0.6

So far all experiments have had access to the true propensities
that generated the synthetic click data. However, in real-world settings propensities need to be estimated and are necessarily subject
to modeling assumptions. So, we evaluate the robustness of the
learning algorithm to propensity misspecification.
Figure 6 shows the performance of SVM PropDCG and SVM
PropRank when the training data is generated with η = 1, but
the propensities used in learning are misspecified according to
the η on the x-axis. The results show that SVM PropDCG is at
least as robust to misspecified propensities as SVM PropRank. Both
methods degrade considerably in the high bias regime when small
propensities are underestimated – this is often tackled by clipping
[15]. It is worth noting that SVM PropDCG performs better than
SVM PropRank when misspecification leads to propensities that are
underestimated, further strengthening the implicit variance control
conjecture for SVM PropDCG discussed above.

0.55

0.5
0

0.05

0.1

0.15
Noise Level

0.2

0.25

0.3

Figure 5: Test set Avg DCG performance for SVM PropDCG
and SVM PropRank as the noise level increases in terms of
ϵ (n = 170K, η = 1).
SVM PropDCG
SVM PropRank

Avg. DCG of Relevant Results

0.7

0.65

5.7

0.6

0.5
0.5
1 (true)
1.5
Assumed Propensity Model (eta)

2

Figure 6: Test set Avg DCG performance for SVM PropDCG
and SVM PropRank as propensities are misspecified (true
eta = 1, n = 170K, ϵ− = 0.1).

– to understand its impact on the learning algorithm. Figure 4 shows
the impact on DCG performance for both methods. We report
performance for two training set sizes that differ by a factor of 5
(noise ϵ− = 0). We see that SVM PropDCG is at least as robust to
the severity of bias as SVM PropRank. In fact, SVM PropRank’s
performance degrades more at high bias than that of SVM PropDCG,
further supporting the conjecture that the DCG weighting in SVM
PropDCG provides improved variance control which is especially
beneficial when propensity weights are large. Furthermore, as also
noted for SVM PropRank in [15], increasing the amount of training
data by a factor of 5 improves performance of both methods due to
variance reduction, which is an advantage that unbiased learning
methods have over those that optimize a biased objective.

5.5

How well does the CCP converge?

Next, we consider the computational efficiency of employing the
CCP optimization procedure for training SVM PropDCG. Recall
that the SVM PropDCG objective is an upper bound on the regularized (negative) DCG IPS estimate. It is optimized via CCP which
repeatedly solves convex subproblems using the SVM PropRank
solver until the objective value converges.
In Figure 7, optimization progress vs number of iterations as
indicated by the change in objective value as well as the training
DCG SNIPS estimate [29] is shown for 17K training clicks and
the full range of regularization parameter C used in validation.
The figure shows that the objective value usually converges in 3-5
iterations, a phenomenon observed in our experiments for other
amounts of training data as well. In fact, the convergence tends to
take slightly fewer iterations for larger amounts of data. The figure
also shows that progress in objective is well-tracked with progress
in the training DCG estimate, which suggests that the objective is
a suitable upper bound for DCG optimization.
It is worth noting that restarting the optimizer across multiple
CCP iterations can be substantially less time consuming than the
initial solution that SVM PropRank computes. Since only the coefficients of the Quadratic Program change, the data does not need
to be reloaded and the optimizer can be warm-started for quicker
convergence in subsequent CCP iterations.

0.55

0

How robust is SVM PropDCG to
misspecified propensities?

5.8

How robust is SVM PropDCG to noise?

When does the non-linear model improve
over the linear model?

We have seen that SVM PropDCG optimizes DCG better than SVM
PropRank, and that it is a robust method across a wide range of
biases and noise levels. Now we explore if performance can be
improved further by introducing non-linearity via neural networks.
Since the point of this paper is not a specific deep architecture but

Figure 5 shows the impact of noise on DCG performance, as noise
levels in terms of ϵ− increase from 0 to 0.3. The latter results in
click data where 59.8% of all clicks are on irrelevant documents.
As expected, performance degrades for both methods as noise in-

12

Session 1A: Learning to Rank 1

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

Figure 7: Optimization progress with respect to the number of CCP iterations. The objective value is shown in the left plots,
and the training set DCG estimate on the right plots. Each plot corresponds to a particular value of regularization constant C
(n = 17K, η = 1, ϵ− = 0.1).
0.66

Avg. DCG of Relevant Results

0.65

magnitude in the remaining epochs. We did not try any other hyperparameter settings and these settings were held fixed across
varying amounts of training data.

SVM PropDCG
Deep PropDCG

0.64
0.63
0.62

6

0.61

In this paper, we proposed a counterfactual learning-to-rank framework that is broad enough to cover a broad class of additive IR
metrics as well as non-linear deep network models. Based on the
generalized framework, we developed the SVM PropDCG and Deep
PropDCG methods that optimize DCG via the Convex-Concave
Procedure (CCP) and stochastic gradient descent respectively. We
found empirically that SVM PropDCG performs better than SVM
PropRank in terms of DCG, that it is robust to a substantial amount
of presentation bias, noise and propensity misspecification, and
that it can be optimized efficiently. DCG was improved further by
using a neural network in Deep PropDCG.
There are many directions for future work. First, it is open for
which other ranking metrics it is possible to develop efficient and
effective methods using the generalized counterfactual framework.
Second, the general counterfactual learning approach may also
provide unbiased learning objectives for other settings beyond
ranking, like full-page optimization and browsing-based retrieval
tasks. Finally, it is an open question whether non-differentiable (e.g.
tree-based) ranking models can be trained in the counterfactual
framework as well.

0.6
0.59
0.58
0.57
0.56
1.7E3

1.7E4
Number of Training Clicks

CONCLUSION

1.7E5

Figure 8: Test set Avg DCG performance for SVM PropDCG
and Deep PropDCG (η = 1, ϵ− = 0.1)

a novel training objective, we used a simple two-layer neural network with 200 hidden units and sigmoid activation. We expect that
specialized deep architectures will further improve performance.
Figure 8 shows that Deep PropDCG achieves improved DCG
compared to the linear SVM PropDCG given enough training data.
For small amounts of training data, the linear model performs better,
which is to be expected given the greater robustness to overfitting
of linear models.
We also expect improved performance from tuning the hyperparameters of Deep PropDCG. In fact, we only used default parameters
for Deep PropDCG, while we optimized the hyperparameters of
SVM PropDCG on the validation set. In particular, Adam was used
for stochastic gradient descent with weight decay regularizer at
10−6 , minibatch size of 1000 documents and 750 epochs. The learning rate began at 10−6 for the first 300 epochs, dropping by one
order of magnitude in the next 200 epochs and another order of

7

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research was supported in part by NSF Awards IIS-1615706 and
IIS-1513692, an Amazon Research Award, and the Criteo Faculty
Research Award program. All content represents the opinion of
the authors, which is not necessarily shared or endorsed by their
respective employers and/or sponsors.

13

Session 1A: Learning to Rank 1

SIGIR ’19, July 21–25, 2019, Paris, France

REFERENCES

297–306.
[18] Thomas Lipp and Stephen Boyd. 2016. Variations and extension of the convex–
concave procedure. Optimization and Engineering 17, 2 (2016), 263–287.
[19] Tie-Yan Liu. 2009. Learning to Rank for Information Retrieval. Foundations and
Trends in Information Retrieval 3, 3 (2009), 225–331.
[20] Alistair Moffat and Justin Zobel. 2008. Rank-biased Precision for Measurement
of Retrieval Effectiveness. ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS) 27, 1
(2008), 2:1–2:27.
[21] Liang Pang, Yanyan Lan, Jiafeng Guo, Jun Xu, Jingfang Xu, and Xueqi Cheng.
2017. DeepRank: A New Deep Architecture for Relevance Ranking in Information
Retrieval. In ACM Conference on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM).
ACM, 257–266.
[22] Tao Qin and Tie-Yan Liu. 2013. Introducing LETOR 4.0 Datasets. CoRR
abs/1306.2597 (2013).
[23] L. Rigutini, T. Papini, M. Maggini, and F. Scarselli. 2011. SortNet: Learning to
Rank by a Neural Preference Function. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks 22,
9 (Sept 2011), 1368–1380.
[24] Paul R. Rosenbaum and Donald B. Rubin. 1983. The central role of the propensity
score in observational studies for causal effects. Biometrika 70, 1 (1983), 41–55.
[25] T. Schnabel, A. Swaminathan, P. Frazier, and T. Joachims. 2016. Unbiased Comparative Evaluation of Ranking Functions. In ACM International Conference on
the Theory of Information Retrieval (ICTIR).
[26] T. Schnabel, A. Swaminathan, A. Singh, N. Chandak, and T. Joachims. 2016.
Recommendations as Treatments: Debiasing Learning and Evaluation. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML).
[27] B. Schoelkopf and A. J. Smola. 2002. Learning with Kernels. The MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
[28] A. Swaminathan and T. Joachims. 2015. Batch Learning from Logged Bandit
Feedback through Counterfactual Risk Minimization. Journal of Machine Learning
Research (JMLR) 16 (Sep 2015), 1731–1755.
[29] A. Swaminathan and T. Joachims. 2015. The Self-Normalized Estimator for
Counterfactual Learning. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS).
[30] Michael Taylor, John Guiver, Stephen Robertson, and Tom Minka. 2008. SoftRank:
Optimizing Non-smooth Rank Metrics. In ACM International Conference on Web
Search and Data Mining (WSDM). ACM, New York, NY, USA.
[31] V. Vapnik. 1998. Statistical Learning Theory. Wiley, Chichester, GB.
[32] Xuanhui Wang, Michael Bendersky, Donald Metzler, and Marc Najork. 2016.
Learning to Rank with Selection Bias in Personal Search. In ACM Conference on
Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR). ACM.
[33] Xuanhui Wang, Nadav Golbandi, Michael Bendersky, Donald Metzler, and Marc
Najork. 2018. Position Bias Estimation for Unbiased Learning to Rank in Personal
Search. In ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining (WSDM).
[34] Yue Wang, Dawei Yin, Luo Jie, Pengyuan Wang, Makoto Yamada, Yi Chang, and
Qiaozhu Mei. 2016. Beyond Ranking: Optimizing Whole-Page Presentation. In
Proceedings of the Ninth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data
Mining (WSDM). 103–112.
[35] Mingrui Wu, Yi Chang, Zhaohui Zheng, and Hongyuan Zha. 2009. Smoothing
DCG for Learning to Rank: A Novel Approach Using Smoothed Hinge Functions.
In ACM Conference on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 1923–1926. https://doi.org/10.1145/1645953.1646266
[36] Yisong Yue, T. Finley, F. Radlinski, and T. Joachims. 2007. A Support Vector
Method for Optimizing Average Precision. In ACM SIGIR Conference on Research
and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR). 271–278.

[1] Aman Agarwal, Ivan Zaitsev, Xuanhui Wang, Cheng Li, Marc Najork, and
Thorsten Joachims. 2019. Estimating Position Bias without Intrusive Interventions. In International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining (WSDM).
474–482.
[2] Qingyao Ai, Keping Bi, Cheng Luo, Jiafeng Guo, and W. Bruce Croft. 2018. Unbiased Learning to Rank with Unbiased Propensity Estimation. In The 41st International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval (SIGIR). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 385–394. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3209978.3209986
[3] Alexey Borisov, Ilya Markov, Maarten de Rijke, and Pavel Serdyukov. 2016. A
Neural Click Model for Web Search. In Proceedings of the 25th International
Conference on World Wide Web (WWW). 531–541.
[4] Chris Burges, Tal Shaked, Erin Renshaw, Ari Lazier, Matt Deeds, Nicole Hamilton, and Greg Hullender. 2005. Learning to Rank Using Gradient Descent. In
Proceedings of the 22Nd International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 89–96.
[5] Christopher J Burges, Robert Ragno, and Quoc V Le. 2007. Learning to rank with
nonsmooth cost functions. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS). 193–200.
[6] Olivier Chapelle and Mingrui Wu. 2010. Gradient Descent Optimization of
Smoothed Information Retrieval Metrics. Information Retrieval 13, 3 (June 2010),
216–235. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10791-009-9110-3
[7] Olivier Chapelle and Ya Zhang. 2009. A dynamic bayesian network click model
for web search ranking. In International Conference on World Wide Web (WWW).
ACM, 1–10.
[8] Aleksandr Chuklin, Ilya Markov, and Maarten de Rijke. 2015. Click Models for
Web Search. Morgan & Claypool Publishers.
[9] Nick Craswell, Onno Zoeter, Michael Taylor, and Bill Ramsey. 2008. An Experimental Comparison of Click Position-bias Models. In International Conference on
Web Search and Data Mining (WSDM). ACM, 87–94.
[10] Zhichong Fang, A. Agarwal, and T. Joachims. 2019. Intervention Harvesting
for Context-Dependent Examination-Bias Estimation. In ACM Conference on
Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR).
[11] D. G. Horvitz and D. J. Thompson. 1952. A Generalization of Sampling Without
Replacement from a Finite Universe. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 47, 260 (1952), 663–
685.
[12] Ziniu Hu, Yang Wang, Qu Peng, and Hang Li. 2018. A Novel Algorithm for
Unbiased Learning to Rank. (2018). arXiv:cs.IR/1809.05818
[13] T. Joachims. 2002. Optimizing Search Engines Using Clickthrough Data. In ACM
SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD). 133–142.
[14] T. Joachims, T. Finley, and Chun-Nam Yu. 2009. Cutting-Plane Training of
Structural SVMs. Machine Learning 77, 1 (2009), 27–59.
[15] Thorsten Joachims, Adith Swaminathan, and Tobias Schnabel. 2017. Unbiased
Learning-to-Rank with Biased Feedback. In ACM International Conference on Web
Search and Data Mining (WSDM). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 781–789.
[16] Guolin Ke, Qi Meng, Thomas Finley, Taifeng Wang, Wei Chen, Weidong Ma,
Qiwei Ye, and Tie-Yan Liu. 2017. LightGBM: A Highly Efficient Gradient Boosting
Decision Tree. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and
R. Garnett (Eds.). 3146–3154.
[17] Lihong Li, Wei Chu, John Langford, and Xuanhui Wang. 2011. Unbiased Offline
Evaluation of Contextual-bandit-based News Article Recommendation Algorithms. In International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining (WSDM).

14

