Short Research Papers II

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Online Job Search: Study of Users' Search Behavior using
Search Engine Query Logs
Behrooz Mansouri 1, Mohammad Sadegh Zahedi 1, Ricardo Campos 2, Mojgan Farhoodi 1
1Web

Azma Lab, Information Technology Faculty, Iran Telecommunication Research Center, Tehran, Iran
2 Polytechnic Institute of Tomar, Smart Cities Research Center, LIAAD - INESC TEC, Portugal
{b.mansouri,s.zahedi,farhoodi}@itrc.ac.ir, ricardo.campos@ipt.pt

ABSTRACT

A study by Kuhn and Mansour [12] showed that, the unemployed
persons who used the internet to find a job, were re-employed
about 25% faster than comparable workers who do not search for
a job online. Another research by Prakash [15], shown that for
those employees who found their jobs online, the exit rates are
lowered by at least 28%. The availability of online job searches,
has also lead to a bunch of records concerning the job seeking
behaviors ready to be studied. For instance, Jansen et al. [10]
studied how people search for job-related information on the web
and how effective are these searches.
The results of their study show that, individuals, seeking job
information, submit only a single query consisting of several
terms. The study of Stevenson [17] focused on the effect that the
Internet has on the job search behavior and stated that, those who
use the Internet for job seeking purposes were mostly employed
and were likely to leave their current jobs to find a new one. Baker
and Fradkin [2] in turn, used Google search data to study the
impact of unemployment insurance (UI) on job search. They
showed that individuals receiving UI, search less for jobs than
individuals who are unemployed and who are not receiving UI.
While the majority of previous researches have focused on the
impact of online job searches on labor market, only a few works
have studied the properties of job searches from the information
retrieval viewpoint. In particular, Spina et al. [16] compared users’
search behavior for job and talent search, i.e. when a company is
searching across resumes to identify candidate that might be
interested in applying for vacant positions. They used the SEEK
(Australian employment website) log for job search and Yandex
(Russian search engine) log for web search analysis. The results of
their study revealed that user models, ranking factors and success
metrics are different for job and talent searches compared to
general web ones. Faberman and Kudlyak [8] in turn, examined
the relationship between job seekers’ search effort and the
duration of this search. Their findings were two-fold: first, that an
individual job seeker’s search effort increases with search
duration; second, the fact that the longer job seekers look for a
job, the more applications they send per week throughout the
duration of search. Different from previous web search, we focus
on studying job searching behavior by using a two-year query log
records of a Persian general-purpose search engine. Using this
data, we plan to answer the following research questions:
RQ1: How often are search engines used for searching for a job?
RQ2: How is users’ effort different in searches related to jobs?
RQ3: Which websites are mostly clicked regarding job searches?
RQ4: How users formulate their queries in job searches? How
the length of these queries are different from general ones? How
often temporal expressions and named entities such as
organization or location are used in job searches?
RQ5: May search engines help users find their desired job?

Over the last few years, an increasing number of user’s and
enterprises on the internet has generated a global marketplace for
both employers and job seekers. Despite the fact that online job
search is now more preferable than traditional methods - leading
to better matches between the job seekers and the employer’s
intents - there is still little insight into how online job searches are
different from general web searches. In this paper, we explore the
different characteristics of online job search and their differences
with general searches, by leveraging search engine query logs.
Our experimental results show that job searches have specific
attributes which can be used by search engines to increase the
quality of the search results.

KEYWORDS
Query understanding; Query log analysis; Job Search

ACM Reference format:
B. Mansouri, M.S. Zahedi, R. Campos and M. Farhoodi. 2018. SIG
Proceedings Paper in word Format. In Proceedings of ACM SIGIR
conference, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, July 2018 (SIGIR’18), 4 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210125

1 INTRODUCTION
The Internet plays a vital role in our daily life with people of all
ages and experiences constantly browsing the Internet and using
search engines to meet their information needs. For example, an
elderly person may issue a query to get information about a
disease, while a student may do the same to collect information
about a practical research. In general, the Internet has facilitated
people's lives in different aspects and everyday tons of millions of
queries are issued to find the right answer for personal and social
problems. One of the basic concerns of people, from the old time
till now, is having a job that is appropriate to their individual
skills. In the past, finding jobs was done through recruiting
advertisements, mostly on newspapers. But today, with the help
of the Internet, companies have their own ads on their websites.
In addition to this, there are several websites to find a job known
as employment websites, such as Indeed.com or even social
networks such as linkedIn.com that make it easy for job seekers
and enterprises to connect to.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full
citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others
than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise,
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR '18, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
© 2018 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5657-2/18/07…$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210125

1185

Short Research Papers II

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

The overall goal of such analyses is to understand how online
job seeking is done and what are the differences between these
type of searches and general ones. By understanding users’
behavior, search engines will be able to provide better results and
search services. For instance, our analysis on query formulation
shows that, in 35% of job searches, users add temporal expressions
to their queries, of which 93.5% were referring to recent time. This
may indicate that users are targeting fresh information on job
searches which may lead search engines to consider different
ranking algorithms for these searches. The remainder of this
paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents our experimental
setting. Section 3 describes the different results of our
experiments. Finally, Section 4 provides some conclusions and
outlines future work.

As this figure suggests, job searches are mostly done within
the first days of the week (in Persian calendar, Thursday and
Friday are weekend days). By looking at the figure one can
observe that 20.7% of the queries related to this task are issued on
Saturday to a minimum of 6.5% on Friday. This contrast with the
frequency of general searches which show a reverse trend as more
queries are issued during the weekends as opposed to the
beginning of the week. This can be leveraged by content providers
and companies who may plan to publish their hiring
advertisements during the first days of the week, when job seekers
tend to more active in searching for a job. Another interesting
observation in this research was the distribution of Job related
queries by cities. To do this, we considered the users’ IP address.
Table 1 indicates the distribution of job search related queries in
the five cities with most job searches. Each city has a unique IP
range.
Table 1. The distribution of job search related in the five
cities having the most queries issued.

2 EXPERIMENTAL SETTING
To conduct our analysis, we resort to a Persian general-purpose
search engine (parsijoo.ir) query log consisting of 27M queries and
corresponding users’ interaction with the search engine collected
from March 2015 to March 2017. To select the job search-related
queries from the logs we rely on keyword-based techniques.
Following the work of Beitzel et al. [4], we asked 5 students, for
each one to suggest a list of 20 terms commonly used for job
searches. We then selected the top-20 frequent seed terms (such
as hiring, employment and job) and from the query log records,
extracted the queries containing these terms. In the next step, we
explored the extracted records to identify other frequent terms
that are used in job searches queries. For this purpose, we start by
considering the top-100 frequent terms and selected only those
related to the job search task. In particular, 30 more terms were
selected, which added to the previous 20, totalized 50 seed terms.
Any query containing these terms is recognized as a job search
related query. With this method, 512,483 job search records were
extracted from query logs. To compare the job searches with
general searches (those not related to job search) we randomly
selected the same amount of records not containing any of these
terms (512K) from the query log.

#
1
2
3
4
5

Percentage of Job search

Population (in million)

32.3%
9.7%
6.3%
2.8%
2.1%

8.6
5.12
3
1.73
1.13

Esfahan
Mashhad
Tabriz
Ahwaz

As can be seen, job searches were dominantly done in the
industrial cities. More than 30% of the job queries were issued by
users in Tehran (the capital of Iran). Although one can argue that
this is the biggest city in Iran with more than 8.6M of people, still
we can find a few other cities which are not within the top-5
biggest cities in Iran, and where a search for a job is still a realm.
One such information can be used by search engines to better
target their ads for a few cities, where job search is predominantly
carried out. The impact of local aspects of web search on
advertising – associating geographic queries with ads – is not a
new topic and has been studied over the last few years [1,3,7].

3.2 Users’ Effort
In this section, we aim to understand the difference, if any, in the
user’s effort when posing queries concerning the search of a job
or a general query. Our assumption, is that unlike a normal search,
users looking for a job aim to browse all possible pages related to
their query as a way to review all job positions that suits them,
which makes job search a recall-oriented searching process. This
leads users to issue more queries within the same search session
regarding a job position. To verify this assumption, we began by
comparing the number of queries per session in job search related
sessions against normal search sessions. The obtained results
show that, on average, 1.62 general Persian web search queries are
issued by a user, while 2.45 were submitted in search sessions
related to job search (any search session that contains at least one
query related to the job seeking task), thus suggesting that users
try to reformulate their query to better find the desired
information. To consubstantiate our assumption, we also studied
the number of clicks on search engine result pages (SERPs) in both
job and normal searches. The obtained results show that, for job
searches the average number of clicks per search session sums up
to 3.69 clicks, while for general searches this figure is reduced to
only 1.30 clicks, which may also be related to the fact that some
of this web pages are of navigational nature. Though, this tends
to confirm that users prefer to visit more webpages related to their
queries when looking for information regarding the job search

3 EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In this section we present the results of our analysis on job
searches and attempt to provide answers to each one the research
questions.

3.1 Frequency of Job Search
As stated in the previous section, 512,483 of queries issued by
users are related to the job seeking task, which account for 1.89%
of the total queries. This answers our first research question, and
clearly shows that job search queries are just a tiny part of the
search task. Although 1.89% seems to be a small percentage, still
it represents a considerable number of queries, which we should
look at carefully. To better understand the frequency of job search
queries, we plotted their distribution by week days in Figure 1.
25.0%
20.0%
15.0%
10.0%
5.0%
0.0%

Job Searches

city
Tehran

General Searches

Figure 1.The distribution of job search related and other
type of queries during week days.

1186

Short Research Papers II

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

task. Finally, we studied the search session duration. For this
purpose, we consider the time between the first and the last query
submitted to the search engine within the same search session.
Therefore search sessions with only one query are not considered.
Our analysis indicates that, the average search duration for job
searches is 15.98 minutes, while for general search is only 3.04
minutes. This shows that job search sessions are, on average,
approximately 12 minutes longer than general searches and that
users spend more time to review the results related to job searches
when compared to general ones. Overall, it can be seen that the
users’ effort is considerable higher in job searches when compared
to general searches, as more queries are issued, more result pages
are viewed and more time is spent by users to seek their desired
job. This answers our second research question and confirms that
job search is a recall-oriented process, which may, per se, justify
a different result retrieval strategy by search engines.

are used when issuing queries related to the job search task. We
begin by analyzing the query length of both job and general
searches, as several experiments [5,6,11] have proven that, in
general, existing retrieval methods, perform worse for long
queries than for shorter ones. Figure 2 shows the boxplot of query
length distribution for both types of queries. As can be seen from
this figure, the most frequent queries related to the job search task
have a length between 4 and 6 terms, with 5.3 terms per query on
average, which is 2.1 terms longer when compared to general
searches.

3.3 Clicked Pages
In this section, we will study the popular clicked pages in job
searches in order to answer research question number three. Our
goal is to study if users prefer to view the organizations website
(who are looking for employees) or employment websites, such as
indeed.com. To do so, we considered the top 300 clicked URLs in
job searches, which account for 71% of the total clicked pages in
job searches. Next, we manually categorize them into one the four
types below:
 Employment: vertical web search engines web pages
belonging to job agents such as “www.bazarekar.ir”.
 News: news websites such as “www.yjc.ir”.
 Organization: webpages belonging to specific organization
such as “www.police.ir”.
 Other: any webpages that cannot be put into one of the
previous types.
The results obtained show that employment websites were the
most clicked pages with 51% of the total. This may indicate that,
users prefer to continue their job searches through vertical search
engines that may provide better job search services for them, such
as constraint for cities, sex, age or salary. The second type of
clicked pages are Organizations which accumulate 29% of the total
clicked pages. By further exploring these webpages, it was
observed that they belong to well-known organizations which
hire on a regular basis and usually have a dedicated web page to
that purpose. The submitted queries that led into clicking such
pages show that users were aware of the recruitment process and
were searching for more precise information about the
employment conditions. In turn, news pages account for only 15%
of the clicked pages, mostly referring to governmental companies
displaying information about the hiring process. The other type
of pages only account for 5% of total clicked web pages. Overall,
from this obtained data, it can be concluded that the majority of
job seekers, prefer to be forwarded to specialized websites as
opposed to general web search engines which lack in providing
job-dedicated search options. This should be taken into account
by search engines, which have a great opportunity here to
increase the users’ satisfaction.

Figure 2. Boxplot of query length distribution for job and
general searches.
Next, we studied the use of temporal expressions in job
searches. By running our Persian Time tagger [14] on job search
queries, we observed that 35% of these queries contain temporal
expressions. This contrasts with the results of our recent study
(over the same query log dataset used here) on the use of temporal
expressions in web searches [13] where we were able to show that
a minority of only 1.89% of the queries contain temporal
expressions. To better understand the use of temporal information
within this context, we studied to which time these temporal
expressions refer to. Noticeably, the majority of temporal
expressions, 93.5% to be more precise, refer to current time, 5.2%
to future and only 1.3% to the past. This emphasis on the freshness
of results for job searches justifies and supports the use of special
retrieval techniques by search engines. Finally, we aim to
understand whether Location and Organization named entities
are used when posing queries related to the job search task. For
this purpose, we used the Persian named entity recognizer toolkit
(http://31.184.132.168/ner/index.html) and labelled the queries
regarding the job searches. Our analysis shows that in 22% of all
the job searches, users have mentioned the place where they are
seeking for a job (e.g., “English Teacher in Tehran”). Going into
details, not all the locations, as expected, are used equally in job
searches queries. Indeed, locations in the industrial cities are more
referred to. This information can be used by search engines in
tasks such as query suggestion, by suggesting the location where
users may find a job. Figure 3 shows the distribution of locations
mentioned in job searches in each city in the top-10 most frequent
referred cities.
10.00%
8.00%
6.00%
4.00%
2.00%
0.00%

3.4 Query Formulation

Figure 3. The distribution of locations mentioned in job
searches by cities. (Top-10 popular cities)
All these cities are well-known industrial cities in Iran
providing many job opportunities. Interestingly, a further analysis
showed that 85% of the job searches containing a reference to a

In this section, we aim to study the different aspects related to
query formulation, in particular the differences between job
search and general searches regarding query length and the use
of temporal expressions in queries. In addition, we also aim to
study, how often named entities such as location and organization

1187

Short Research Papers II

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

city, were referring to a local city, which is to a city where the
query was issued, meaning that, only a minority of the users (15%)
look for a job outside their hometown. From this information, one
may conclude that search engines should restrict the job search
results to the related local job opportunities. In contrast to these
results, a minority of only 5% of the queries includes organizations
mentioned by the users. This shows that users prefer to be offered
job search results from all possible organizations and confirms
that search engines should pay more attention to recall measure.
Overall, our analysis in this section proved that, job seekers
formulate their queries differently when compared to issuing
general web queries, either by using more terms, temporal
expressions and constraints such as location. This answers
research question number four.

with constraints related to famous cities or companies such as
“Iran air” or “National Oil Company” were satisfiable for users.
Moreover, adding too many constraints to the job search query
will also lead into dissatisfaction as these three search engines
were mostly capable of considering a part of them. For example,
the query “Female accountant Mashhad part time” has 3 different
constraints including sex (female), location (Mashhad) and job
type (part time). In summary, our analysis revealed that search
engines are not yet capable of providing good search results for
job searches compared to general ones.

4 CONCLUSIONS
Despite the fact that online job search has become common mean
of job seeking process, users’ job search behavior was not fairly
studied. In this paper, we explored online job searchers’ behavior
and compared job and general searches. Our analysis showed that,
job seekers formulated their query differently when compared to
general searches and target fresh data in their searches. By
investigating three different general-purpose search engines, our
finding shows that job search result are not yet as satisfactory as
general searches. As for future work, we plan to use our
experiment findings and study how search engines can provide
better job searches facilities and increase users’ satisfaction.

3.5 Users’ Satisfaction
Our final analysis was to understand how current search engine
may help users seeking for a job. To do so, we asked three editors
to submit 1000 random job queries to 3 different search engines
(namely Google, Bing and Parsijoo) and check the top-5 result
pages to verify whether or not their information need is satisfied.
They were asked to score search engines by one of the three
scores: 2, 1 or 0, where 2 means that the search engine was able to
find at least one document that satisfies all of the constraints in
the query, 1 means constraints in the query were partially
satisfied and 0 indicates that no constraints in the user query were
satisfied. For instance, editors will give a score of 2 for the results
of the query “Part time software engineer in Tehran”, if both “Part
time” and “Tehran” - job type and location constraint – are
mentioned in one of the top-5 results. If only one of the two
constraints are satisfied, they would score 1 and if none is satisfied
a score of 0 would be given. To be able to compare job searches
with general searches, we also randomly selected 1000 queries
from the general ones. An inter-rater reliability analysis using the
Fleiss Kappa statistics [9] was performed to determine consistency
among the editors. Overall, the annotators obtained about 0.72 of
agreement level, which represents a high agreement between
editors. Figure 4 indicates the average scores for each of the three
search engines for job and general searches.
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
Google

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by Iran Tele-communication Research Center (ITRC)
and partially funded by the ERDF through the COMPETE 2020 Programme within
project POCI-01-0145-FEDER-006961, and by National Funds through the FCT as part
of project UID/EEA/50014/2013.

REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]

[7]

Bing
Parsijoo
JobSearch
General Search

[8]
[9]

Figure 4. The average scores for Google, Bing and Parsijoo
for job and general searches.

[10]
[11]

As can be seen from this plot, and regardless the search engine,
results were noticeably more satisfiable for general search then
for job search ones. This may raise the question of whether
general purpose search engines such as Google, Bing or Parsijoo
can provide good job-search results as our observation in section
3.3 also showed that users prefer to click on employment websites.
To better understand the reason for lower satisfaction in job
searches, we reviewed the queries with the lowest scores. Our
exploration shows that search engines fails to satisfy hard
constraints, that is constraints which may be rare in general
searches but can be casually used in job searches. For instance, for
the query “miner employment at Khvaf”, search engines fail to
satisfy “Khvaf” location constraint, as this is a small not wellknown city in Iran. On the other hand, the result for job searches

[12]
[13]

[14]
[15]
[16]

[17]

1188

Anggono, I. N., Haddadi, H., Chaabane, A., & Kaafar, M. A. (February-2016) Preserving
Privacy in Geo-Targeted Advertising. In International Workshop on Ad Targeting at
Scale,WSDM (pp).ACM
Baker, S. R., & Fradkin, A. (2014). The Impact of Unemployment Insurance on Job
Search: Evidence from Google Search Data. Review of Economics and Statistics, (0).
Barford, P., Canadi, I., Krushevskaja, D., Ma, Q., & Muthukrishnan, S. (2014, April).
Adscape: Harvesting and analyzing online display ads. In Proceedings of the 23rd
international conference on World wide web (pp. 597-608). ACM.
Beitzel, S. M., Jensen, E. C., Chowdhury, A., Frieder, O., & Grossman, D. (2007).
Temporal analysis of a very large topically categorized web query log. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science and Technology, 58(2), 166-178.
Bendersky, M., & Croft, W. B. (2008). Discovering key concepts in verbose queries. In
Proceedings of the 31st annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and
development in information retrieval, ACM’08, 491-498.
Broder, A. Z., Carmel, D., Herscovici, M., Soffer, A., & Zien, J. (2003). Efficient query
evaluation using a two-level retrieval process. In Proceedings of the twelfth
international conference on Information and knowledge management, ACM’03, 426434.
Dan, O., Parikh, V., & Davison, B. D. (2016, February). Improving IP geolocation using
query logs. In Proceedings of the Ninth ACM International Conference on Web Search
and Data Mining (pp. 347-356). ACM.
Faberman, R. J., & Kudlyak, M. (2014). The intensity of job search and search duration.
Fleiss, J. L. (1971). Measuring Nominal Scale Agreement Among many Raters. In
Psychological Bulletin, 76(5), 378-382.
Jansen, B. J., Jansen, K. J., & Spink, A. (2005). Using the web to look for work:
Implications for online job seeking and recruiting. Internet research, 15(1), 49-66.
Kuhn, P., & Mansour, H. (2014). Is Internet job search still ineffective?. The Economic
Journal, 124(581), 1213-1233.
Kumaran, G., & Allan, J. (2007). A Case For Shorter Queries, and Helping Users Create
Them. In HLT-NAACL, 220-227.
Mansouri, B., Zahedi, M. S., Campos, R., Farhoodi, M., & Yari, A. (2018, April).
Understanding the use of Temporal Expressions on Persian Web Search. In Companion
of the The Web Conference 2018 on The Web Conference 2018 (pp. 1743-1748).
International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee.
Mansouri, B., Zahedi, M. S., Campos, R., Farhoodi, M., & Rahgozar, M. (2018, March).
ParsTime: Rule-Based Extraction and Normalization of Persian Temporal Expressions.
In European Conference on Information Retrieval (pp. 715-721). Springer, Cham.
Prakash, A. (2015). Three essays on labor market outcomes. The University of Arizona.
10150/560807.
Spina, D., Maistro, M., Ren, Y., Sadeghi, S., Wong, W., Baldwin, T., Cavedon, L., Moffat,
A., Sanderson, M., Scholer, F. and Zobel, J. (2017) Understanding user behavior in job
and talent search: an initial investigation. In Proceedings of the 2017 SIGIR Workshop
on eCommerce (eCom 2017). CEUR-WS. org.
Stevenson, B. (2008). The Internet and job search (No. w13886). National Bureau of
Economic Research.

