SIRIP: Industry Days

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Causal Inference over Longitudinal Data
to Support Expectation Exploration
Emre Kıcıman

Microsoft Research
emrek@microsoft.com
The answers to these questions are not readily available in a
knowledge base or Wikipedia. But, the information necessary to
answer these questions is already being recorded on social media,
where hundreds of millions of individuals regularly and publicly
report their personal experiences, including the situations they
are in, the actions they take, and the experiences they have afterwards. For example, people talk about work or relations health and
dietary practices, and even log information about their illnesses
and coping strategies. People report and share this information for
many reasons: keeping in touch with friends, gaining social capital,
diary-keeping, or even helping others. And with increasing use of
personal sensors and devices, from exercise trackers to health monitors, such data streams are becoming more regular, more detailed
and more reliable. These longitudinal data streams, in aggregate,
capture a rich set of relationships between the situations in which
people find themselves, the actions they choose to take, and the
outcomes they experience.
In this presentation, we describe how such individual-level, longitudinal datasets can be analyzed with causal inference methods
to directly identify what can be expected following some action or
individual experience. The result is a semi-structured expectation
map that captures how situations are likely evolve over time. These
expectation maps can be use as an important building block for
a wide variety of data-driven search, decision-support and forecasting applications—from automatically generating decision aids,
such as pros and cons lists, to helping individuals ground their
own experiences in how a situation is likely to evolve over time. In
addition, expectation maps may be useful for policy makers’ and
scientists’ explorations across a variety of domains.

ABSTRACT
Many people use web search engines for expectation exploration:
exploring what might happen if they take some action, or how
they should expect some situation to evolve. While search engines
have databases to provide structured answers to many questions,
there is no database about the outcomes of actions or the evolution
of situations. The information we need to answer such questions,
however, is already being recorded. On social media, for example,
hundreds of millions of people are publicly reporting about the
actions they take and the situations they are in, and an increasing
range of events and activities experienced in their lives over time.
In this presentation, we show how causal inference methods can be
applied to such individual-level, longitudinal records to generate
answers for expectation exploration queries.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems → Web search engines; Specialized information retrieval;

KEYWORDS
search, causal inference, social media, expectation exploration
ACM Reference Format:
Emre Kıcıman. 2018. Causal Inference over Longitudinal Data to Support
Expectation Exploration. In SIGIR ’18: The 41st International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research & Development in Information Retrieval, July 8–
12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1 page. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210215

TALK DESCRIPTION
Everyone, at some point in their lives, finds themselves in an unfamiliar situation, considering what they should do, and trying to
understand what to expect of the future. We see evidence of such
expectation exploration in web searches, with people seeking the
possible consequences of their choices and the outcomes of situations. These explorations cover both consequential topics, such as
life-changing education and career choices (e.g., “Should I join the
military?”) or major financial and personal decisions (e.g., “Should
I move to California?”); as well as more quotidian topics, such as
the consequences of purchase decisions, athletic training regimens
and dating rituals.

Acknowledgements
This presentation brings together ideas developed through close collaboration and discussion with many others. In particular, I would
like to thank Paul Bennett, Scott Counts, Munmun De Choudhury,
Susan Dumais, Adam Fourney, Alexandra Olteanu, Matt Richardson,
Jorgen Thelin, Onur Varol, Ryen White, and Lidong Zhou.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’18, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
© 2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5657-2/18/07.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210215

1345

