Doctoral Consortium

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Case-Based Retrieval Using Document-Level Semantic Networks
Stefano Marchesin

Department of Information Engineering
University of Padua
Padua, Italy
stefano.marchesin@unipd.it
cases and literature be represented in such a way that the semantic,
and authoritative, information that lies within them can be connected and leveraged to the best? (ii) How can be leveraged such
semantic representations of medical cases and literature in such
a way that, given a query (i.e. a medical case), we can effectively
retrieve related medical cases or literature?
To answer question (i), we propose to automatically create semantic networks[4] for each document by combining three different
techniques: entity linking, relation extraction and link prediction[2,
3]. Entity linking and relation extraction represent the core of the
document-level semantic networks’ creation process. Relying on
a Knowledge Base (KB), these techniques allow to extract authoritative concepts and semantic relations from documents. When
semantic networks are created, link prediction is used to enrich
these networks with additional “weaker” relations, directly inferred
from the KB — and not extracted from documents. In fact, with
link prediction, indirect linkages between nodes of a KB can be
analyzed, and previously unknown relationships can be discovered.
The research proposed for (i) leads the research for (ii) to leverage
documents’ semantic networks for case-based retrieval. Leveraging
documents’ semantic networks in both indexing and retrieval stages
is the key element to bring case-based retrieval to a higher semantic
level. The analysis of documents’ semantic networks can be divided
into two approaches: explicit — which is based on the explicit
connections of the network — and implicit — which is based on
the latent features inferred from the network. Thus, document
similarity measures able to understand and exploit — both implicitly
and explicitly — the relations occurring between concepts of the
semantic networks, represent the core of the retrieval phase.
Recalling the limited time clinicians have while practicing, precision is favored over recall. By representing documents through
semantic networks made of authoritative concepts and semantic
relations — that can reduce vocabulary mismatch and better represent the interdependence between medical concepts within text —
the proposed retrieval model is suited to address this need.
In 2014, NIST’s TREC has introduced a CDS search track. Therefore, to evaluate the methodology described we are considering the
NIST’s TREC CDS search track datasets, as they provide important
use cases in CDS.

ABSTRACT
We propose a research that aims at improving the effectiveness
of case-based retrieval systems through the use of automatically
created document-level semantic networks. The proposed research
leverages the recent advancements in information extraction and
relational learning to revisit and advance the core ideas of conceptcentered hypertext models. The automatic extraction of semantic
relations from documents — and their centrality in the creation and
exploitation of the documents’ semantic networks — represents our
attempt to go one step further than previous approaches.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems → Document representation; Information extraction; Specialized information retrieval;

KEYWORDS
Information extraction; Semantic networks; Medical information
retrieval
ACM Reference Format:
Stefano Marchesin. 2018. Case-Based Retrieval Using Document-Level Semantic Networks. In SIGIR ’18: The 41st International ACM SIGIR Conference
on Research & Development in Information Retrieval, July 8–12, 2018, Ann
Arbor, MI, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1 page. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3209978.3210221

RESEARCH DIRECTION
Clinical Decision Support (CDS) systems are designed to assist clinicians in providing patient care by producing effective and timely
knowledge that can help in the decision making process. Clinicians
can afford spending a limited time in reading literature while practicing. Therefore, one of the tasks of CDS systems is to retrieve,
given a medical case of interest, highly related medical literature
that could aid clinicians in formulating diagnoses or deciding treatments for the case at hand. This side of CDS systems is known as
case-based retrieval.
The proposed research has the objective of improving the effectiveness of case-based retrieval systems. The seminal works on
concept-centered hypertext models [1], revisited and leveraged to
address case-based retrieval, represent the starting point of the research. Two main questions drive the research: (i) How can medical

REFERENCES
[1] M. Agosti and F. Crestani. 1993. A Methodology for the Automatic Construction
of a Hypertext for Information Retrieval. In SIGIR. ACM, 745–753.
[2] F. Liu, J. Chen, A. Jagannatha, and H. Yu. 2016. Learning for Biomedical Information Extraction: Methodological Review of Recent Advances. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.07993 (2016).
[3] M. Nickel, K. Murphy, V. Tresp, and E. Gabrilovich. 2016. A review of relational
machine learning for knowledge graphs. Proc. IEEE 104, 1 (2016), 11–33.
[4] J. F. Sowa. 2014. Principles of semantic networks: Explorations in the representation
of knowledge. Morgan Kaufmann.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’18, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
© 2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5657-2/18/07.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210221

1451

