Workshop

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

DATA:SEARCH’18 – Searching Data on the Web
Paul Groth

Laura Koesten

Philipp Mayr

Elsevier Labs
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
p.groth@elsevier.com

The Open Data Institute; University
of Southampton
London, United Kingdom
laura.koesten@theodi.org

GESIS – Leibniz Institute for the
Social Sciences
Cologne, Germany
philipp.mayr@gesis.org

Maarten de Rijke

Elena Simperl

University of Amsterdam
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
derijke@uva.nl

University of Southampton
Southampton, United Kingdom
e.simperl@soton.ac.uk

ABSTRACT

schema.org and web tables to open government data portals, knowledge bases such as Wikidata and scientific data repositories [4, 14].
This data fuels many novel applications, for example fact checkers
and question answering systems, and enables advances in machine
learning and AI.
Just like any other resources on the web, data benefits from
network effects - it becomes more useful, and creates more value,
when it is discoverable. And yet, despite advances in information
retrieval, the Semantic Web and data management, data search is
by far not as advanced, both technologically [2] and from a user
experience point of view [12], as related areas such as document
search.
Most approaches to user-centric data search are domain-specific
or have been created with certain task contexts, data schemas or
data formats in mind [5]. Conducting research to explore dataset
search outside these constraints is both important and timely for a
venue such as SIGIR. The aim of the workshop is to be a venue to
present and exchange ideas and experiences for discovering and
searching all types of structured or semi-structured datasets and to
discuss how concepts and lessons learned from academic search,
entity search, digital libraries, and web search could be transferred
to data search scenarios.
The opportunities to share and establish links between different
perspectives on search and discovery for different kinds of data are
significant and can inform the design of a wide range of information retrieval technologies, including search engines, recommender
systems and conversational agents.
A broad range of methods and insights are important to enable
the discovery of, and access to, data published on the web, including

This half day workshop explores challenges in data search, with a
particular focus on data on the web. We want to stimulate an interdisciplinary discussion around how to improve the description, discovery, ranking and presentation of structured and semi-structured
data, across data formats and domain applications. We welcome
contributions describing algorithms and systems, as well as frameworks and studies in human data interaction. The workshop aims
to bring together communities interested in making the web of data
more discoverable, easier to search and more user friendly.

KEYWORDS
Data search, dataset retrieval, human data interaction, web of data
ACM Reference Format:
Paul Groth, Laura Koesten, Philipp Mayr, Maarten de Rijke, and Elena
Simperl. 2018. DATA:SEARCH’18 – Searching Data on the Web. In SIGIR
’18: The 41st International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research & Development
in Information Retrieval, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 4 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210195

1

ORGANISING COMMITTEE
• Paul Groth, Elsevier Labs, The Netherlands
• Laura Koesten, The Open Data Institute, United Kingdom
• Philipp Mayr, GESIS – Leibniz Institute for the Social Sciences, Germany
• Maarten de Rijke, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands
• Elena Simperl, University of Southampton, United Kingdom

2 MOTIVATION AND RELEVANCE
2.1 Background

• analyzing contextual information for datasets, including
mentions of datasets
• browsing and query support for structured and semi-structured
data
• inference and data enrichment systems
• learning to match for datasets
• learning to rank datasets
• mining direct links between documents, datasets or data
records
• summaries and descriptions of datasets targeting users or
search engines
• concepts and methods to present data and entity-centric
results.

As an increasing amount of data becomes available on the web,
searching for it becomes an increasingly important, timely topic [7].
The web hosts a whole range of new data species, published in
structured and semi-structured formats - from web markup using

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution International 4.0 License.
SIGIR ’18, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
© 2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5657-2/18/07.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210195

1419

Workshop

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

study describing the information seeking process for structured
data, Koesten et al. [12] combined in-depth interviews with data
professionals and a search log analysis of a large open governmental data portal. They note that finding data is challenging, even for
data professionals who are familiar with state of the art tools, and
that data search is often exploratory and complex. Evaluation criteria for datasets in a search scenario show unique characteristics –
the importance of context alongside information about provenance
and methods for collection and analysis emerged as key factors,
which help professionals determine whether a dataset is relevant
and useful for their purposes [8, 12].

We see a large space for discussion and future research in the
development of federated data discovery and search technologies,
which leverages the most recent advances in information retrieval,
Semantic Web and databases, and is mindful of human factors.

2.2

Recent developments

Dataset search and discovery has emerged in a range of complementary disciplines. Kunze and Auer [13] introduce dataset retrieval
as a specialization of information retrieval, however, they restrict
their scope to the process of returning relevant RDF datasets.
Several architectures have been proposed to support discoverability of web data. The Linked Data community has put forward
a set of principles and technologies to publish data in a form that
makes it easy for applications to find and reuse it. Publishers are
encouraged to define links between datasets, which can be used,
alongside de-referencing URIs, to find additional data. The Linked
Open Data Cloud, as well as large knowledge graphs such as Wikidata and DBpedia are prime examples of this approach.
A related development are data portals, for example in open government and some scientific domains, and data sharing networks,
such as Kaggle and data.world. Data portals are centralized repositories where an institution, or multiple institutions, provide access
to their datasets. They classify the datasets according to pre-defined
categories, support basic keyword and faceted search features, and
present dataset results via short descriptions, metadata and sometimes visualizations. In a search log analysis of open data portals,
Kacprzak et al. [9] found that queries issued on data portals differ
from those issued to web search engines in their length and structure. Data sharing networks use a social network paradigm to help
people discover new datasets and engage with data publishers and
users.
Dataset search might be construed as just another type of entity
search, like expert finding [1] or product search [16]. However,
Thomas et al. [15] show that dataset repositories have poor search
over and inside tables. It is difficult for a user to tell from a repository’s portal whether a useful dataset is available, and this problem
is only likely to get worse. Thomas et al. demonstrate that the naïve
approach of full-text search is not appropriate. They describe an
alternative, based on inferring types of data and indexing columns
as a unit, and demonstrate some improvements in early success especially when long captions are not available. New retrieval models
are needed, models, moreover, that can be optimized with limited
training and/or interaction data [3, 5].
Data requires context to create meaning [6], to make sense of
it. This is dependent on people’s data literacy, technical skills and
prior knowledge. Kelly [10] also shows that individuals vary significantly in terms of cognitive makeup, prior knowledge and behavioral dispositions. While this applies to search for all information
sources generally, literature suggests unique characteristics when
the information source is structured data. In user studies with social scientists, Kern and Mathiak [11] found that the quantity and
quality of metadata are far more critical in dataset search than in literature search, where convenience is most important. For empirical
social scientists, the choice of research data was found to be more
relevant than the choice of literature; therefore they were willing
to put more effort into the retrieval process. In a mixed methods

3

THEME AND PURPOSE

The objective of this workshop was to bring together researchers
and practitioners interested in advancing data search on the web.
This includes looking at the specifics of data-centric information
seeking behavior, understanding interaction challenges in data
search on the web, and analyzing the cognitive processes involved
in the consumption of structured data by users. At the same time,
we aimed to discuss architectures and technologies for data search
- including semantics and information retrieval for structured and
semi-structured data (e.g., ranking algorithms and indexing), in
particular in the context of decentralized and distributed systems
such as the web. We are interested in approaches to analyze, characterize and discover data sources. We want to facilitate a continuing
discussion around data search across formats and domain-specific
applications.
We envisioned the workshop as a forum for researchers and
practitioners from various disciplines to come together and discuss
common challenges and identify synergies for joint initiatives.

3.1

Topics

DATA:SEARCH’181 sought application-oriented papers, as well as
more theoretical papers, position papers and empirical studies.
The workshop proposed a multidisciplinary discussion on the
following themes, with a focus on search and discovery of RDF,
CSV, JSON and other structured and semi-structured data sources:
• Analyzing behavioral traces during data search
• Approaches to personalization and contextualization in dataset search
• Data summarization
• Dataset representation for retrieval (standards, models, workarounds)
• Decentralized and distributed architectures and algorithms
in data search
• Deep linking of datasets
• Entity recognition in datasets
• Evaluation of dataset search tools and algorithms
• Fusing, cleaning, ranking and refining dataset search results
• Information seeking behavior for data (interactive data retrieval)
• Data indexing and profiling approaches
• Learning to rank for data search
• Query routing taking into account relevance, quality and
profiles of distributed datasets
1 https://datasearch-ws.github.io/2018/

1420

Workshop

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Retrieval models for data search
Scalability and performance of distributed data queries
Search results presentation for datasets
Visual and speech interfaces to datasets
Semantic dataset search
Usability of data portals and data discovery tools
User modeling for data search
Systems and user studies in data search in vertical domains,
including transport, geospatial data, science, weather etc.

Knowledge Technologies for the Social Sciences (WTS). He received
his PhD in applied informetrics and information retrieval from the
Berlin School of Library and Information Science at Humboldt University Berlin in 2009. To date, he has been awarded substantial
research funding (PI, Co-PI) from national and European funding
agencies. Philipp has published in top conferences and prestigious
journals in the areas informetrics, information retrieval and digital
libraries. His research interests include: interactive information
retrieval, scholarly recommendation systems, data retrieval, nontextual ranking, bibliometric and scientometric methods, applied
informetrics, science models in digital libraries, knowledge representation, semantic technologies, user studies, information behavior.
More info: https://philippmayr.github.io/. GESIS – Leibniz Institute
for the Social Sciences, Email: philipp.mayr@gesis.org

We encouraged contributions using a variety of methods. This
can include, for example, user studies, lab experiments, systembased evaluations, but also experiments using gamification and
crowdsourcing.
The workshop was organized around a keynote, a set of lightening talks and round table discussions.

4

Prof Maarten de Rijke is professor of Computer Science at the
University of Amsterdam. He is a member of the Royal Dutch Academy of Arts and Sciences (KNAW), a former director of Amsterdam
Data Science, a collaborative network involving 600+ data scientists
in the Amsterdam area, and the founding director of ICAI, the Innovation Center for Artificial Intelligence. His research is situated at
the interface of AI and IR, and focused on learning to rank, semantic
search, and autonomous environments for information interaction.
More info: https://staff.fnwi.uva.nl/m.derijke/. University of Amsterdam. Email: derijke@uva.nl

ORGANIZERS

Datasets as information objects are situated at the intersection of
several disciplines – information retrieval, semantic web, user interaction, and library science. Discovery of, and access to datasets, is
an emerging shared interest of academic and industrial researchers.
The team behind this workshop proposal represents all of these
angles and interests, both in the organizers and in the proposed
program committee.

4.1

Co-chairs

Dr Paul Groth is Disruptive Technology Director at Elsevier Labs.
He has done research at the University of Southern California and
the Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam. His research focuses on intelligent systems for dealing with large amounts of diverse contextualized knowledge with a particular focus on web and science
applications. This includes research in data provenance, data science, data integration and knowledge sharing. Paul is co-author
of "Provenance: an Introduction to PROV" as well as over a 100
peer-reviewed publications. He has chaired multiple international
events including Beyond the PDF 2, The International Semantic
Web Conference, and the International Provenance and Annotation
Workshop.
More info: http://pgroth.com. Elsevier Labs; email: p.groth@elsevier.com

Prof Elena Simperl is professor of Computer Science at the University of Southampton. Her research interests include knowledge
engineering, Social Web technologies, and crowdsourcing. She has
contributed and led over 20 national and European research projects
and authored more than 100 scientific publications, and chaired the
European Semantic Web Conference (ESWC) in 2011 and 2012 and
International Semantic Web Conference (ISWC) in 2016. She was
vice-president of STI International until 2016 and the director of
the ESWC summer school series. She has co-chaired more than 15
workshops, including the series on Theory and Practice of Social
Machines (SOCM) at WWW, Crowdsourcing the Semantic Web at
ISWC and Ontology Engineering in a Data Driven World at EKAW.
More info: http://elenasimperl.eu/. University of Southampton, UK;
Email: e.simperl@soton.ac.uk

4.2

Laura Koesten is a Maria Curie Skłodowska fellow, doing her PhD
at the Open Data Institute and at the University of Southampton
in the UK. She is part of WDAqua, a European Union’s Horizon
2020 initiative to advance state of the art Question Answering. Her
research interests are Human Computer Interaction, Interactive
Information Retrieval with a focus on dataset retrieval, Open Data
and Semantic Interfaces. In her PhD she is looking at ways to improve Human Data Interaction in IIR systems. She publishes at CHI
and has a background in Human Factors, with an MSc degree from
Loughborough University.
The Open Data Institute; University of Southampton, UK; Email:
laura.koesten@theodi.org

Programme Committee

A list of PC members is as follows:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Dr Philipp Mayr is a deputy department head and a team leader
at the GESIS – Leibniz Institute for the Social Sciences department

1421

Alexander Kotov (Wayne State University)
Arjen de Vries (Radboud University Nijmegen)
Arno Scharl (Modul University Vienna)
Axel Polleres (Vienna University of Economics and Business)
Eva Méndez (Open research data)
Kuansan Wang (Microsoft)
Laura Dietz (University of New Hampshire)
Michael Gubanov (University of Texas, San Antonio)
Peter Haase (Metaphacts)
Steffen Lohmann (Fraunhofer IAIS)

Workshop

5

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

RELATED WORKSHOPS

[8] Kathleen Gregory, Paul T. Groth, Helena Cousijn, Andrea Scharnhorst, and Sally
Wyatt. 2017. Searching Data: A Review of Observational Data Retrieval Practices.
CoRR abs/1707.06937 (2017). arXiv:1707.06937 http://arxiv.org/abs/1707.06937
[9] Emilia Kacprzak, Laura M. Koesten, Luis-Daniel Ibáñez, Elena Simperl, and Jeni
Tennison. 2017. A Query Log Analysis of Dataset Search. Springer International
Publishing, Cham, 429–436. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-60131-1_29
[10] Diane Kelly. 2009. Methods for Evaluating Interactive Information Retrieval
Systems with Users. Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval 3, 1-2 (2009),
1–224. https://doi.org/10.1561/1500000012
[11] Dagmar Kern and Brigitte Mathiak. 2015. Are There Any Differences in Data
Set Retrieval Compared to Well-Known Literature Retrieval?. In Research and
Advanced Technology for Digital Libraries, Sarantos Kapidakis, Cezary Mazurek,
and Marcin Werla (Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 197–208.
[12] Laura M. Koesten, Emilia Kacprzak, Jenifer F. A. Tennison, and Elena Simperl.
2017. The Trials and Tribulations of Working with Structured Data: -a Study
on Information Seeking Behaviour. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’17). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
1277–1289. https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025838
[13] Sven R. Kunze and Soren Auer. 2013. Dataset Retrieval. In 2013 IEEE Seventh
International Conference on Semantic Computing. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSC.
2013.12
[14] Oliver Lehmberg, Dominique Ritze, Robert Meusel, and Christian Bizer. 2016.
A large public corpus of web tables containing time and context metadata. In
Proceedings of the 25th International Conference Companion on World Wide Web.
75–76. https://doi.org/10.1145/2872518.2889386
[15] Paul Thomas, Rollin M. Omari, and Tom Rowlands. 2015. Towards Searching
Amongst Tables. In Proceedings of the 20th Australasian Document Computing
Symposium, ADCS 2015, Parramatta, NSW, Australia, December 8-9, 2015. 8:1–8:4.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2838931.2838941
[16] Christophe Van Gysel, Maarten de Rijke, and Evangelos Kanoulas. 2016. Learning
latent vector spaces for product search. In CIKM 2016: 25th ACM Conference on
Information and Knowledge Management. ACM, 165–174.

Some of the organizers will be involved in the delivery of a workshop on data profiling and search in April 2018 at the Web Conference.2 That workshop is a follow-up of a workshop that has
been run for many years at the European and International Semantic Web Conference, which focused on semantic techniques to
enrich datasets to help with tasks such as discovery, description
and sense-making of entity-centric data on the web.3
While we see many synergies between DATA:SEARCH’18 and
those events, the focus of DATA:SEARCH’18 is on search. We aim
to gain a better understanding of the extent to which techniques,
methods and lessons learned from document retrieval broadly construed could apply to data-centric contexts, and explore in more
depth the differences between the two areas from a technical and
interaction perspective.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was partially supported by the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (under the Marie
Skłodowska-Curie grant ID 642795) and They Buy For You (grant
ID 780247), EPSRC (Datastories, grant ID EP/P025676/1), Ahold Delhaize, Amsterdam Data Science, the Bloomberg Research Grant program, the China Scholarship Council, the Criteo Faculty Research
Award program, DFG, grant no. SU 647/19-1, the OSCOSS project, Elsevier, the European Community’s Seventh Framework Programme
(FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement nr 312827 (VOX-Pol), the
Google Faculty Research Awards program, the Microsoft Research
Ph.D. program, the Netherlands Institute for Sound and Vision,
the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO) under project nrs CI-14-25, 652.002.001, 612.001.551, 652.001.003, and
Yandex.
All content represents the opinion of the authors, which is not
necessarily shared or endorsed by their respective employers and/or
sponsors.

REFERENCES
[1] Krisztian Balog, Yi Fang, Maarten de Rijke, Pavel Serdyukov, and Luo Si. 2012.
Expertise retrieval. Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval 6, 2–3 (August
2012), 127–256.
[2] Michael J. Cafarella, Alon Halevy, and Jayant Madhavan. 2011. Structured Data
on the Web. Commun. ACM 54, 2 (Feb. 2011), 72–79. https://doi.org/10.1145/
1897816.1897839
[3] Zeljko Carevic, Sascha Schüller, Philipp Mayr, and Norbert Fuhr. 2018. Contextualised Browsing in a Digital Library’s Living Lab. In Proceedings of JCDL 2018.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1804.06426
[4] Gabriella Cattaneo, Mike Glennon, Rosanna Lifonti, Giorgio Micheletti, Alys
Woodward, Marianne Kolding, Angela Vacca, Carla La Croce, and David Osimo.
2015. European Data Market SMART 2013/0063, D6 - First Interim Report.
https://idc-emea.app.box.com/s/k7xv0u3gl6xfvq1rl667xqmw69pzk790.
[5] Zhuyun Dai, Yubin Kim, and Jamie Callan. 2017. Learning To Rank Resources.
In Proceedings of the 40th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan, August 7-11, 2017.
837–840.
[6] Brenda Dervin. 1997. Given a context by any other name: Methodological tools
for taming the unruly beast. Information seeking in context 13 (1997), 38.
[7] Kathleen Gregory, Helena Cousijn, Paul Groth, Andrea Scharnhorst, and Sally
Wyatt. 2018. Understanding Data Retrieval Practices: A Social Informatics Perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.04971 (2018).

2 https://profiles-datasearch.github.io/2018/
3 http://data4urbanmobility.l3s.uni-hannover.de/index.php/en/2017/11/07/

profiles-workshop-iswc-2017/

1422

