Tutorial

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Generative Adversarial Nets for Information Retrieval:
Fundamentals and Advances
Weinan Zhang

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
wnzhang@sjtu.edu.cn
particular information need (e.g., represented by query keywords,
user profile or question sentence) [24]. For the methodologies of
IR, in general there are two schools of thinking, namely (i) the
generative modeling methods, which assume a generative process
from the query to the document (or the inverse one) and build
generative models to maximize the observation likelihood [20, 28],
and (ii) the discriminative modeling methods, which directly build
model to score each candidate pair of information need and item
and then train the model in a regression or ranking framework
[3, 16]. For both directions, machine learning techniques based on
big data have been playing an important role.
On the other hand, the recent development and success of deep
learning [14] have made it applied to various fields including information retrieval (IR). In fact, during the recent three years deep
learning has to-some-extent been revolutionizing the IR area, involving the IR applications of web search [9, 21], recommender
systems [1, 6], sentiment analysis [25] and question answering
[19] etc. The Neural Information Retrieval (NeuIR) workshop1 has
become one of the most popular workshops in SIGIR 2016 and 2017.
However, most above deep learning work is merely focused on
replacing the IR scoring functions with some carefully designed
neural network architectures, i.e., the majority of the work on deep
learning for IR is on discriminative models [9, 11, 21]. Therefore,
one would think whether deep generative models could benefit IR
solutions and, furthermore, whether the merge of generative and
discriminative models could help each other towards a better final
solution.
Generative adversarial nets (GANs) [8] are a novel deep unsupervised learning framework which has attracted much attention since
its birth in 2014 [7]. In GAN framework, a generative model tries
to map a randomly sampled noise vector to a data instance (e.g., an
image) while a discriminative model is trained to judge whether
a data instance is real or generated. With the interplay between
the generative and discriminative models, there theoretically exists
a Nash equilibrium where the generative model perfectly fits the
underlying real data distribution while the discriminative model is
totally fooled by the generated data.
With the inspiration from GANs, there has been some preliminary work trying applying GANs to solve information retrieval
tasks since 2017 [24]. Regarding the user’s preference distribution
over the candidate documents as the underlying data distribution
to fit, it is straightforward to build a GAN framework for IR tasks.
The generative retrieval model p(d |q, r ) captures the conditional
probability of the user (represented by her query q) selecting a candidate document d given the relevance criteria r . The discriminative
retrieval model p(r |q, d) estimates whether the user likes the candidate document d. Such an interplay between the generative and

ABSTRACT
Generative adversarial nets (GANs) have been widely studied during the recent development of deep learning and unsupervised
learning. With an adversarial training mechanism, GAN manages
to train a generative model to fit the underlying unknown real
data distribution under the guidance of the discriminative model
estimating whether a data instance is real or generated. Such a
framework is originally proposed for fitting continuous data distribution such as images, thus it is not straightforward to be directly
applied to information retrieval scenarios where the data is mostly
discrete, such as IDs, text and graphs. In this tutorial, we focus on
discussing the GAN techniques and the variants on discrete data
fitting in various information retrieval scenarios. (i) We introduce
the fundamentals of GAN framework and its theoretic properties;
(ii) we carefully study the promising solutions to extend GAN onto
discrete data generation; (iii) we introduce IRGAN, the fundamental
GAN framework of fitting single ID data distribution and the direct
application on information retrieval; (iv) we further discuss the
task of sequential discrete data generation tasks, e.g., text generation, and the corresponding GAN solutions; (v) we present the
most recent work on graph/network data fitting with node embedding techniques by GANs. Meanwhile, we also introduce the
relevant open-source platforms such as IRGAN and Texygen to help
audience conduct research experiments on GANs in information
retrieval. Finally, we conclude this tutorial with a comprehensive
summarization and a prospect of further research directions for
GANs in information retrieval.

KEYWORDS
Generative Adversarial Nets, Information Retrieval, Discrete Data,
Text Generation, Network Embedding, Reinforcement Learning,
Deep Learning
ACM Reference Format:
Weinan Zhang. 2018. Generative Adversarial Nets for Information Retrieval:
Fundamentals and Advances. In SIGIR ’18: The 41st International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, July 8–
12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 4 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210184

1

BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATIONS

Information retrieval (IR) refers to the task of returning a list of
information items (e.g., documents, products or answers) given a
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’18, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
© 2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5657-2/18/07.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210184

1 https://neu-ir.weebly.com/

1375

Tutorial

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

discriminative retrieval models potentially unifies the two schools
of thinking in IR [24].
From the data perspective, the major data format in IR is discrete tokens, e.g., IDs, text, or linked nodes in a network. Directly
applying the original version of GANs onto such discrete data is
infeasible because one cannot direct take gradient over the discrete
data instance itself [8]. Thus, several branches of solutions have
been proposed, including end-to-end Gumbel-softmax [12] and
policy gradient based reinforcement learning [22].
In this tutorial, we introduce the very recent development of
GAN techniques on information retrieval. We start from introducing the original GAN framework designed for continuous data
generation and show its failure to be directly applied to discrete
data generation. Then we introduce the several methodologies to
bypassing the problem of taking gradient over discrete data and
derive the corresponding models. Based on these fundamental techniques, we discuss the GAN models working on three different
discrete data format in IR tasks, namely

raise questions during the lecture and there will be a half-hour QA
session at the end of the tutorial.

3.2

Introduction to GANs (35 mins). We introduce the background
and fundamentals of the original version of generative adversarial nets which are designed for continuous data generation. The
theoretic Nash equilibrium of GAN will be discussed to help the audience understand the rationale behind such a minimax game. Also
the recent advanced applications of GANs on image and speech
generation scenarios will be presented to help the audience know
about the wide applications of GANs. Finally, we reveal the problem
of applying the original version of GANs to discrete data in information retrieval tasks, which lies in taking gradient over discrete
tokens. Based on such a problem, we introduce several promising
solutions including Gumbel-softmax and reinforcement learning.

• IDs (tokens), for the most basic IR task and collaborative filtering for recommender systems;
• Text (sequences of tokens), for sentence, poem, article generation and question answering;
• Networks (graphs of tokens), for node embedding, node classification, link prediction and community detection etc;

Reinforcement Learning (25 mins). In order to extend GAN
framework onto discrete data generation, we perform a brief review of reinforcement learning (RL). The basic idea of Markovian
decision processes (MDPs), value function, policy gradient, REINFORCE algorithm [26], likelihood ratio trick and Monte Carlo
search will be presented. A simple example will be provided to help
the audience get familiar with the presented RL techniques.

where the fundamental thinking and different solutions will be
discussed. Finally, we conclude this tutorial by summarizing the
existing work on GANs for IR and discuss some promising future
directions, e.g., the recently proposed Cooperative Training (CoT)
[17].

2

Detailed Schedule

The planned 3-hour schedule of the tutorial is listed as follows.

GANs for IR Tasks (35 mins). With the previous fundamental
delivered to the audience, we start to introduce the basic GAN
models to the simplest IR tasks, where the information items are
just represented by IDs (e.g., document ID or product ID without detailed information like text or multi-field features) and each
query-document pair has been represented by a set of categorical
and continuous features. Such a simple setting is illustrated in Figure 1. The IRGAN framework [24] is the central content of this part.
We will also present more details beyond the IRGAN paper itself,
e.g., the reward function design and importance sampling tricks.
Furthermore, we will come to the ad hoc text retrieval task and link
the GAN mechanism to (pseudo) relevance feedback and present
the most recent work on this direction.

OBJECTIVES

As a merge of information retrieval and machine learning, the target
audience of this tutorial is sufficiently broad. And the main objective of this tutorial is to encourage the technical communications
between informmation retrieval and machine learning, between
application-oriented and methodology-oriented research, and between engineering and theory.
• For the researchers, engineers and students working on information retrieval such as text mining, natural language processing,
graph pattern mining, network analysis, recommender systems
etc., this tutorial offers a series of new methodologies which are
potential to improve the model performance in their studied
scenarios.
• For machine learning or artificial intelligence researchers, this
tutorial helps them broad the scope by providing various application scenarios for generative adversarial nets and reinforcement learning.
With this tutorial, we hope the community would develop new
research problems, novel methodologies and even new solution
paradigms on information retrieval.

Figure 1: An illustration of GAN for simplest IR tasks where
each document is represented just by IDs. For each step, the
generative model selects one candidate document for the
query and the discriminative model makes a relevance judgment over the query-document pair which is used to guide
the generative model for better modeling the user’s preference over the candidate documents.

3 FORMAT AND DETAILED SCHEDULE
3.1 Tutorial Format
The tutorial is expected to be presented as a 3-hour lecture with
slides and hangouts to the audience. It is free for the audience to

1376

Tutorial

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

GANs for Text Generation (35 mins). Extending from the classic
document retrieval tasks, we investigate the potential of leveraging
GANs to generate sequences of discrete tokens, where text generation is the most typical scenario [18]. We first reveal the problem
of exposure bias of the traditional maximum likelihood (MLE) estimation methods and some previous solutions such as scheduled
sampling [2], then we discuss the advantages of GAN techniques
for text generation tasks. Many recently proposed techniques will
be introduced and compared in this part, including SeqGAN [27],
RankGAN [15], LeakGAN [10], MaliGAN [5], GSGAN [13] etc.,
where SeqGAN is considered as the most representative framework, as illustrated in Figure 2. We will also make an empirical
comparison between these models over various evaluation metrics.

G

True data
Real World

G

Next
action

MC
search

D
Reward

State
Train

Figure 3: An illustration of GraphGAN for neighbor node
generation (selection) [23]. Given a target node vc , for each
step the generative model selects another node which is supposed to be linked to vc and the discriminative model is
trained to distinguish the real node pairs and the generated
ones.

Reward

D

4 SUPPORTING MATERIALS
4.1 Online Meterials

Reward

Generate

Reward

A website (http://wnzhang.net/tutorials/sigir2018/) for this tutorial
will be made available online right before the lecture is presented.
All the relevant materials will be made available on this website,
including the talk information, presentation slides, referred papers,
speaker information and related open source projects etc.

Policy Gradient

Figure 2: An illustration of SeqGAN for text generation [27].
Compared to one-step generation of discrete token as shown
in Figure 1, generating sequence of discrete tokens needs the
consideration of subsequent states, which is nationally formulated as a reinforcement learning problem. Here Monte
Carlo search is leveraged to make an unbiased estimation of
state-action value following the current generation policy.

4.2

Offline Materials

We may prepare paper handouts for each audience in the lecture.
This depends on the cost of printing in Ann Arbor.

4.3

Open Sourced Platforms

Some open sourced platforms will be introduced to the audience to
encourage them to run simple code of GANs for IR tasks.
• IRGAN [24] (https://github.com/geek-ai/irgan), a code framework of GANs for discrete data generation based on REINFORCE algorithms to support web search, item recommendation and question answering tasks.
• Texygen [29] (https://github.com/geek-ai/Texygen), a benchmarking platform, to support research on open-domain text
generation models. Texygen has not only implemented a majority of text generation models, but also covered a set of metrics
that evaluate the diversity, the quality and the consistency of
the generated texts.
• GraphGAN [23] (https://github.com/hwwang55/GraphGAN),
a repository of the recent solutions for learning node embedding, link prediction and node classification based on GAN
techniques.

GANs for Graph/Network Learning (15 mins). Graph or network is a complicated discrete data format, based on which there
are various information retrieval related tasks like item recommendation, social network analysis, fraud detection, knowledge graphs
etc. In this part, we will first briefly introduce network embedding
techniques and then introduce the recent work on applying GANs
to network embedding and the subsequent graph mining tasks like
GraphGAN [23] and KBGAN [4]. The key difference of applying
GANs on graph data and sequence data lies in the token (node) sampling strategies as illustrated in Figure 3. The solutions on graph
data make use of the graph neighborhood information to higher
the sampling efficiency.
Future Prospective and Summarization (20 mins). At the end
of the tutorial, we raise several unsolved problems and promising
future research directions of GANs for IR tasks, e.g., cooperative
training (CoT) [17] and generation evaluation methods [29], are
discussed. We finally summarize this tutorial by highlighting the
key factors and taking home messages of this lecture.

5

RELEVANCE TO THE INFORMATION
RETRIEVAL COMMUNITY

Apparently, this tutorial is highly relevant to SIGIR 2018 referred
topics and the information retrieval community. As described in
Section 3.2, the core studied problem is the deep generative and
discriminative models in information retrieval, which is highly relevant to Artificial Intelligence, Semantics, and Dialog track in SIGIR

Q&A Session (15 mins). We communicate with the audience by
question answering, where we could also share some experience
of conducting experiments of GANs and reinforcement learning
techniques for IR tasks.

1377

Tutorial

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

2018; the discussed application scenarios on which the machine
learning models are based including web search, recommender
systems, question answering, text composing, social network analysis etc., which are the cared topics in Search and Ranking track
and Content Recommendation, Analysis and Classification track; the
overall adversarial learning framework itself is a novelty, which
would be insightful to the audience from Foundations and Future
Directions track.
Past relevant tutorials in top-tier conferences include:

REFERENCES
[1] Bahriye Akay, Oğuz Kaynar, and Ferhan Demirkoparan. 2017. Deep learning
based recommender systems. In UBMK. IEEE, 645–648.
[2] Samy Bengio, Oriol Vinyals, Navdeep Jaitly, and Noam Shazeer. 2015. Scheduled
sampling for sequence prediction with recurrent neural networks. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems. 1171–1179.
[3] Chris Burges, Tal Shaked, Erin Renshaw, Ari Lazier, Matt Deeds, Nicole Hamilton,
and Greg Hullender. 2005. Learning to rank using gradient descent. In Proceedings
of the 22nd international conference on Machine learning. ACM, 89–96.
[4] Liwei Cai and William Yang Wang. 2017. KBGAN: Adversarial Learning for
Knowledge Graph Embeddings. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.04071 (2017).
[5] Tong Che, Yanran Li, Ruixiang Zhang, R Devon Hjelm, Wenjie Li, Yangqiu Song,
and Yoshua Bengio. 2017. Maximum-Likelihood Augmented Discrete Generative
Adversarial Networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.07983 (2017).
[6] Paul Covington, Jay Adams, and Emre Sargin. 2016. Deep neural networks
for youtube recommendations. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM Conference on
Recommender Systems. ACM, 191–198.
[7] Ian Goodfellow. 2016. NIPS 2016 tutorial: Generative adversarial networks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1701.00160 (2016).
[8] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley,
Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Generative adversarial
nets. In Advances in neural information processing systems. 2672–2680.
[9] Jiafeng Guo, Yixing Fan, Qingyao Ai, and W Bruce Croft. 2016. A deep relevance
matching model for ad-hoc retrieval. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM International
on Conference on Information and Knowledge Management. ACM, 55–64.
[10] Jiaxian Guo, Sidi Lu, Han Cai, Weinan Zhang, Jun Wang, and Yong Yu. 2017.
Long Text Generation via Adversarial Training with Leaked Information. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1709.08624.
[11] Xiangnan He, Lizi Liao, Hanwang Zhang, Liqiang Nie, Xia Hu, and Tat-Seng
Chua. 2017. Neural collaborative filtering. In Proceedings of the 26th International
Conference on World Wide Web. International World Wide Web Conferences
Steering Committee, 173–182.
[12] Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. 2017. Categorical reparameterization
with gumbel-softmax. ICLR (2017).
[13] Matt J Kusner and José Miguel Hernández-Lobato. 2016. Gans for sequences
of discrete elements with the gumbel-softmax distribution. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1611.04051 (2016).
[14] Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. 2015. Deep learning. nature
521, 7553 (2015), 436.
[15] Kevin Lin, Dianqi Li, Xiaodong He, Zhengyou Zhang, and Ming-Ting Sun. 2017.
Adversarial Ranking for Language Generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.11001
(2017).
[16] Tie-Yan Liu et al. 2009. Learning to rank for information retrieval. Foundations
and Trends® in Information Retrieval 3, 3 (2009), 225–331.
[17] Sidi Lu, Lantao Yu, Weinan Zhang, and Yong Yu. 2018. CoT: Cooperative Training
for Generative Modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.03782 (2018).
[18] Sidi Lu, Yaoming Zhu, Weinan Zhang, Jun Wang, and Yong Yu. 2018. Neural Text
Generation: Past, Present and Beyond. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.07133 (2018).
[19] Lin Ma, Zhengdong Lu, and Hang Li. 2016. Learning to Answer Questions from
Image Using Convolutional Neural Network.. In AAAI, Vol. 3. 16.
[20] Jay M Ponte and W Bruce Croft. 1998. A language modeling approach to information retrieval. In Proceedings of the 21st annual international ACM SIGIR
conference on Research and development in information retrieval. ACM, 275–281.
[21] Yelong Shen, Xiaodong He, Jianfeng Gao, Li Deng, and Grégoire Mesnil. 2014.
Learning semantic representations using convolutional neural networks for web
search. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on World Wide Web.
ACM, 373–374.
[22] Richard S Sutton, David A McAllester, Satinder P Singh, Yishay Mansour, et al.
1999. Policy Gradient Methods for Reinforcement Learning with Function Approximation.. In NIPS. 1057–1063.
[23] Hongwei Wang, Jia Wang, Jialin Wang, Miao Zhao, Weinan Zhang, Fuzheng
Zhang, Xing Xie, and Minyi Guo. 2017. GraphGAN: Graph Representation
Learning with Generative Adversarial Nets. AAAI (2017).
[24] Jun Wang, Lantao Yu, Weinan Zhang, Yu Gong, Yinghui Xu, Benyou Wang, Peng
Zhang, and Dell Zhang. 2017. Irgan: A minimax game for unifying generative
and discriminative information retrieval models. In SIGIR. ACM, 515–524.
[25] Ying Wen, Weinan Zhang, Rui Luo, and Jun Wang. 2016. Learning text representation using recurrent convolutional neural network with highway layers. NeuIR
Workshop (2016).
[26] Ronald J Williams. 1992. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for
connectionist reinforcement learning. Machine learning 8, 3-4 (1992), 229–256.
[27] Lantao Yu, Weinan Zhang, Jun Wang, and Yong Yu. 2017. SeqGAN: Sequence
Generative Adversarial Nets with Policy Gradient.. In AAAI. 2852–2858.
[28] Chengxiang Zhai and John Lafferty. 2004. A study of smoothing methods for language models applied to information retrieval. ACM Transactions on Information
Systems (TOIS) 22, 2 (2004), 179–214.
[29] Yaoming Zhu, Sidi Lu, Lei Zheng, Jiaxian Guo, Weinan Zhang, Jun Wang, and
Yong Yu. 2018. Texygen: A Benchmarking Platform for Text Generation Models.
In SIGIR.

• Hang Li, Zhengdong Lu. Deep Learning for Information Retrieval. SIGIR 2016.
• Tom Kenter, Alexey Borisov, Christophe van Gysel, Mostafa
Dehghani, Maarten de Rijke, Bhaskar Mitra. Neural Networks
for Information Retrieval (NN4IR). SIGIR 2017.
• Bhaskar Mitra, Nick Craswell. Neural Text Embeddings for
Information Retrieval. WSDM 2017.
Although these tutorials cover deep learning techniques and their
applications on IR, they focus on discriminative models or single
generative models rather than adversarial training mechanisms
for IR. To our knowledge, this is the first tutorial focused on GAN
techniques for IR.

6

SPEAKER INFORMATION AND
QUALIFICATION

The tutorial speaker, Dr. Weinan Zhang, is current a tenure-track
assistant professor in Shanghai Jiao Tong University. His research
interests include machine learning and big data mining, particularly, deep learning and reinforcement learning techniques for
real-world data mining scenarios, such as computational advertising, recommender systems, text mining, web search and knowledge
graphs. He was selected as one of the 20 rising stars of KDD research community in 2016. His work IRGAN won SIGIR 2017 Best
Paper Honorable Mention Award. He and his teammates won the
3rd place in KDD-CUP 2011 for Yahoo! Music recommendation
challenge and the final champion in 2013 global RTB advertising
bidding algorithm competition. Weinan earned his Ph.D. from University College London in 2016 and Bachelor from ACM Class of
Shanghai Jiao Tong University in 2011. He was an intern at Google,
Microsoft Research and DERI.
As for presenting such a tutorial on GANs for IR, Weinan Zhang
would be qualified because (i) he is one of the major authors of
IRGAN [24], which is the first fundamental research work on solve
IR problems with a GAN solution; (ii) he leads the research projects
of SeqGAN [27], LeakGAN [10] and Texygen [29], which are among
the most advanced researches for text generation; (iii) he is also
an author of GraphGAN [23], which is the first work on node
embedding learning based on graph data.
Besides, Weinan Zhang has led or participated several tutorials:
• Weinan Zhang, Jian Xu. Learning, Prediction and Optimisation
in RTB Display Advertising. CIKM 2016.
• Jun Wang, Shuai Yuan, Weinan Zhang. Real-Time Bidding based
Display Advertising: Mechanisms and Algorithms. ECIR 2016.
Acknowledgment. The work is sponsored by National Natural
Science Foundation of China (61632017, 61702327, 61772333), Shanghai Sailing Program (17YF1428200), MSRA Collaborative Research
and DIDI Collaborative Research Funds.

1378

