Workshop

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

SIGIR 2018 Workshop on eCommerce (ECOM18)
Jon Degenhardt

eBay Inc.
jdegenhardt@ebay.com

Mohit Kumar

Flipkart, India
k.mohit@flipkart.com

Pino Di Fabbrizio

Surya Kallumadi

Rakuten Institute of Technology
difabbrizio@gmail.com

Kansas State University
surya@ksu.edu

Yiu-Chang Lin

Andrew Trotman

Rakuten Institute of Technology
yiuchang.lin@rakuten.com

University of Otago
andrew@cs.otago.ac.nz

Huasha Zhao

Alibaba Group
huasha.zhao@alibaba-inc.com

ABSTRACT

ACM Reference format:
Jon Degenhardt, Pino Di Fabbrizio, Surya Kallumadi, Mohit Kumar, YiuChang Lin, Andrew Trotman, and Huasha Zhao. 2018. SIGIR 2018 Workshop
on eCommerce (ECOM18). In Proceedings of The 41st International ACM
SIGIR Conference on Research Development in Information Retrieval, Ann
Arbor, MI, USA, July 8–12, 2018 (SIGIR ’18), 3 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210192

eCommerce Information Retrieval has received little attention in the
academic literature, yet it is an essential component of some of the
largest web sites (such as eBay, Amazon, Airbnb, Alibaba, Taobao,
Target, Facebook, and others). SIGIR has for several years seen
sponsorship from these kinds of organisations, who clearly value
the importance of research into Information Retrieval. The purpose
of this workshop is to bring together researchers and practitioners
of eCommerce IR to discuss topics unique to it, to set a research
agenda, and to examine how to build datasets for research into this
fascinating topic.
eCommerce IR is ripe for research and has a unique set of problems. For example, in eCommerce search there may be no hypertext
links between documents (products); there is a click stream, but
more importantly, there is often a buy stream. eCommerce problems are wide in scope and range from user interaction modalities
(the kinds of search seen in when buying are different from those
of web-page search (i.e. it is not clear how shopping and buying
relate to the standard web-search interaction models)) through to
dynamic updates of a rapidly changing collection on auction sites,
and the experienceness of some products (such as Airbnb bookings).
This workshop is a follow up to the “SIGIR 2017 workshop on
eCommerce (ECOM17)”, which was organized at SIGIR 2017, Tokyo.
In the 2018 workshop, in addition to a data challenge, we will be
following up on multiple aspects that were discussed in the 2017
workshop.

1

INTRODUCTION

Search, ranking and recommendation have applications ranging
from traditional web search to document databases to vertical
search systems. In this workshop we will explore approaches for
search and recommendations of products, and other related aspects
of eCommerce Information Retrieval. Although the task is the same
as web-page search (fulfill a user’s information need), the way in
which this is achieved is very much different. On product sites (such
as eBay, Flipkart, Amazon, and Alibaba), the traditional web-page
ranking features are either not present or are present in a different
form.
The entities that need to be discovered (the information that
fulfills the need) might be unstructured, associated with structure,
semi-structured, or have facets such as: price, ratings, title, description, seller location, and so on. Domains with such facets raise
interesting research challenges such as a) relevance and ranking
functions that take into account the tradeoffs across various facets
with respect to the input query b) recommendations based on entity
similarity c) recommendations based on user location (e.g. shipping
cost), and so on. In the case of eCommerce search and recommendation these challenges require inherent understanding of product
attributes, user behavior, and the query context. Product sites are
also characterized by the presence of a dynamic inventory with a
high rate of change and turnover, and a long tail of query distribution.
Outside of search but still within Information Retrieval, the same
feature in different domains can have radically different meaning.
For example, in email filtering the presence of “Ray-Ban” along
with a price is a strong indication of spam, but within an auction
setting this likely indicates a valid product for sale. Another example
is natural language translation; company names, product names,
and even product descriptions do not translate well with existing
tools. Similar problems exist with knowledge graphs that are not
customised to match the product domain.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems → Environment-specific retrieval;

KEYWORDS
eCommerce, Product Search, Recommendation
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR ’18, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
© 2018 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5657-2/18/07. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210192

1407

Workshop

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

This workshop will bring together researchers and practitioners
to identify a set of core research questions in eCommerce search
and recommendation. This will bring the community together in a
way that has never happened before ECOM17. It will help attract
research funding to search in this domain. It will help attract researchers and postgraduate students to eCommerce and product
search. Finally, it will help broaden the definition of Information
Retrieval at conferences such as SIGIR.
The workshop will also examine the problem of data availability.
As the purpose of a product site is to make data on entities available,
the same security concerns that plague other search domains do
not exist. However sales and seller information is private and proprietary and likely to be unavailable. We hope that the discussion
on data will result in both a proposal to release data that can be put
to an eCommerce site, as well as some tasks that can be examined
on that data set – indeed the data challenge is a success in this area.

2

awareness within the academic community of the problems faced
by this domain.

3.1

The workshop relates to all aspects of eCommerce search and recommendations. Research topics and challenges that are usually
encountered in this domain include:
• Machine learning techniques such as online learning and
deep learning for eCommerce applications
• Semantic representation for users, products and services &
Semantic understanding of queries
• Structured data and faceted search
• The use of domain specific facets in search and other IR tasks
• Temporal dynamics for Search and Recommendation
• Models for relevance and ranking for multi-faceted entities
• Deterministic (and other) sorting of results lists (e.g. price
low to high including postage)
• Personalized search and recommendations
• Session aware and session oriented search and recommendation
• Inventory display issues (example: legal, ethical, and spam)
• Cold start issues
• Personalization and the use of personal facets such as age,
gender, location etc.
• Indexing efficiency incorporating structured product data
and catalog information
• Indexing and search in a rapidly changing environment (for
example, an auction site)
• Scalability
• Diversity in product search and recommendations
• Strategies for resolving extremely low (or no) recall queries
• Query intent
• Semantic understanding of queries
• The use of external features such as reviews and ratings in
ranking
• User interfaces and personalization
• Reviews and sentiment analysis
• The use of social signals in ranking and beyond
• The balance between business requirements and user requirements (revenue vs relevance)
• Trust
• Live experimentation
• Desktop and mobile issues
• Questions and answering, chatbots for eCommerce
• Conversational commerce: shopping using voice assistants
such as Amazon Alexa and Google Now
• Fashion eCommerce

SIGIR 2017 WORKSHOP ON ECOMMERCE
(ECOM17)

The SIGIR 2017 Workshop on eCommerce (ECOM17)1 was the
first time this workshop was held. ECOM17 was a full day workshop, and about 60 people registered to attend [1]. ECOM17 had
a rich and diverse set of contributions and discussions ranging
from eCommerce systems architecture to product search and recommendations to fraud detection. The workshop received twenty
one submissions from both industry and academia, and accepted
thirteen submissions (62% acceptance rate). SIGIR was an excellent
venue for the workshop. This workshop was a first and a much
needed forum for bringing together practitioners from industry
and academia working in the eCommerce domain, and acted as a
venue for eCommerce research.
The need to have an active community to discuss problems and
potential opportunities in the eCommerce domain came to the
forefront in the group discussion and panel sessions. Availability of
high quality data sets coupled with well defined problem statements
is another aspect identified that would move the field forward. We
intend to address this in ECOM18 in the form of a data challenge.
A number of participants from industry were willing to contribute
data sets and identify interesting research areas. The workshop
attendees were enthusiastic in their agreement that there should be
future workshops on this topic. A report on ECOM17 was recently
published in SIGIR Forum [2].

3

THEME AND PURPOSE

The primary theme of the workshop is eCommerce search and
recommendation.
The purpose of the workshop is to provide a venue for publication and discussion of Information Retrieval research and ideas
as they pertain to products and eCommerce. We will be bringing
together practitioners and researchers from academia and industry
to discuss the challenges and approaches to search and recommendation. In particular, how to get data.
The goal is to foster collaboration, discussion in the broader IR
community. We are happy to state that we have an agenda to raise
1 ECOM17

Scope

3.2

Data Challenge

The workshop is hosting a machine learning data challenge targeting taxonomy classification for eCommerce-scale product catalogs2 .
The data set contributed by Rakuten3 contains 1 Million titles spread
across more than 3000 leaf categories, with unbalanced class sizes.
2 Rakuten

Data Challenge: https://sigir-ecom.github.io/data-task.html
data is provided by Rakuten Institute of Technology, Boston (RIT-Boston), a
dedicated R&D organization for the Rakuten group
3 The

workshop website: http://sigir-ecom.weebly.com/

1408

Workshop

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

This challenge focuses on the topic of large-scale taxonomy classification where the goal is to predict each product’s category as
defined in the taxonomy tree given a product’s title. For example, in the Rakuten.com catalog, “Dr. Martens Air Wair 1460 Mens
Leather Ankle Boots” is categorized under the “Clothing, Shoes &
Accessories -> Shoes -> Men -> Boots” leaf. Manual and rule based
approaches to categorization are not scalable since commercial
product taxonomies are organized in tree structures with three to
ten levels of depth and thousands of leaf nodes. The cataloging of
product listings through taxonomy categorization is a fundamental problem for any eCommerce marketplace, with applications
ranging from personalized search & recommendation to query understanding.
The challenge presents several interesting research aspects due
to the intrinsic noisy nature of the product labels, the size of modern
eCommerce catalogs, and the typical unbalanced data distribution.
Advances in this area of research have been limited due to the
lack of real data from actual commercial catalogs. Making the data
available to the participants will attract research institutions and
practitioners who did not have the opportunity to contribute their
ideas due to the previous lack of data.

3.3

The final session of the day will be a general discussion session.
The primary topic for discussion will be data availability. Specifically, what guarantees need to be in place for an organisation like
eBay to make a dump available, and can we meet those guarantees?
The workshop schedule and activities are structured to contain
substantial time for discussion and engagement by all participants.

5
6

WORKSHOP OUTCOMES

We believe that the most important outcome of the workshop is the
discussion between individuals at the workshop. It is these discussions that lead to collaboration and future research - unarguably the
ultimate goal of any workshop. This, however, is hard to directly
capture. We will capture what we can in the form of a SIGIR Forum
workshop report. We will produce a proceedings of the workshop
and work with CEUR Workshop Proceedings to ensure they are
appropriately archived.
We expect that there will be lively discussion on data availability.
Since there will be representatives from eCommerce sites present,
we will engage them in discussions on the requirements for data
release. Although the release of data is not a specific goal of this
workshop, we expect it to pave the way for such an event in the
future. We hope that the challenge data will serve as a model to
openness.
An additional goal is to raise awareness of the fascinating problems that litter the eCommerce search battlefield. We hope that
through discussion at the workshop, and SIGIR 2018, we can help
steer the research community towards these problems and in doing
so find solutions to some very difficult problems.

Publish open datasets to facilitate research
in eCommerce IR

During the group and panel discussions of ECOM17, a number
of participants from industry were willing to identify interesting
research problems, and provide data sets tailored for these research
problems. In order to encourage this, we have a data track where
participants can publish open data sets along with details regarding
necessary metrics and replicable baselines. In our opinion the availability of such open datasets and baselines would help researchers
advance the state of the field in this area.

4

PARTICIPATION

This workshop is open to all interested parties.

REFERENCES
[1] Jon Degenhardt, Surya Kallumadi, Maarten de Rijke, Luo Si, Andrew Trotman,
and Yinghui Xu. 2017. SIGIR 2017 Workshop on eCommerce (ECOM17). In
Proceedings of the 40th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’17). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
1425–1426. https://doi.org/10.1145/3077136.3084367
[2] Jon Degenhardt, Surya Kallumadi, Yiu-Chang Lin, Maarten de Rijke, Luo Si,
Andrew Trotman, Sindhuja Venkatesh, and Xu Yinghui. 2018. Report on the
SIGIR 2017 Workshop on eCommerce (ECOM17). SIGIR Forum 51, 3 (Feb. 2018),
128–138. https://doi.org/10.1145/3190580.3190600

WORKSHOP FORMAT

Similar to ECOM17, ECOM18 will be a full day workshop. The
workshop will start with an invited talk from a well respected practitioner (or academic) who is tackling eCommerce search problems.
The invited talk will then be followed by the presentation of
selected papers. A call asking not only for research papers, but also
for position and opinion papers, posters, and dataset papers has
been circulated. All submitted papers and posters will be singleblind, peer reviewed by an international program committee of
researchers of high repute. Accepted papers will be presented with
ample time for discussion; there will also be a poster session fostering further discussion.
After the thought provoking invited talk and presentations we
will break-out into small groups to identify key areas for future
research in eCommerce search. Each group will identify one key
research problem, endeavour to identify the challenges and opportunities (which will likely include the issue of data availability),
and report back to the workshop on their findings. The ideas that
come from this break-out session will form the basis of a research
agenda.

1409

