Doctoral Consortium

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Better Textbooks with Human Language Technology
Sudeshna Das
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
sudeshna.das@iitkgp.ac.in

ABSTRACT

We propose to represent textbook sections in the form of concept
graphs [8], and utilize the linked structure of Wikipedia to determine necessary and sufficient concepts whose inclusion ensures
completeness of the graph, i.e., prerequisite concepts [3] are not
left out, while minimizing redundancy. For example, on the event
of the presence of outgoing edges from an excluded concept C 1 to
a concept C 2 included in the textbook, we suggest that C 1 be also
included to ensure a comprehensive coverage of the subject matter.
We also propose assigning weights to these edges, denoting the
amount of dependence a concept has on another, to facilitate our
aim of finding an optimal ordering of the concepts.

Almost every part of the world relies on textbooks as the primary
medium of imparting education. The quality of education, thus, is
correlated with the quality of textbooks. In general, the quality of
content in the textbooks used in the less-developed countries of the
world is not up to the mark [1]. In addition to their intended purpose of delivering information, textbooks also promote behaviours
that adults wish to pass on to the next generation [7]. It is, thus,
important to ensure that textbooks are helpful in effective learning
and do not condone undesirable social mores. The task of evaluating
textbooks against these parameters is not trivial: experts must go
through the entire content manually. This exercise being not only
laborious, but also expensive [3]. This thesis attempts to propose a
feasible computational alternative to this process.
The dataset that we are working with is comprised of school
textbooks collected from different boards of education of two southeast Asian countries that are widely regarded as ’developing countries’ [4]. In general, a digitized textbook throws a large number of
computational problems that require ideas from a number of disciplines such as Natural Language Processing, Information Retrieval,
Human Computer Interaction and Cognitive Science. In this thesis
we focus on the following research questions.

Research Question 3. How can we automatically identify and
accumulate resources of the same difficulty level as the original
text from external repositories, to facilitate better understanding of
the content among students?
Students often refer to online resources to better understand
textbook content. A major hurdle associated with this practice is
the wide mismatch in difficulty levels of the textbook, and the hits
returned by a search engine [1]. Our aim is to learn to distinguish
between texts of different levels of difficulty by using textbooks as
the training data. We propose to apply a transfer learning-based
approach to use the parameters learned during training to identify
suitable web content. At present, we are planning to work with
school-level basic science textbooks.

Research Question 1. How can we automatically identify the
text fragments that reflect gender bias from textbooks?
The prevalence of gender bias has been reported in textbooks
from many parts of the world [5, 6]. Computational efforts to contain the effects of such biases have been proposed [2], but the
detection of presence of gender bias, and identifying text passages
that exhibit such biases is an unexplored problem. We model the
task as a binary classification problem, with one class being biased text, and the other being unbiased text. For classifying text
fragments, we propose a boosted memory-based model to learn
the hidden patterns of biases from a small amount of labelled data.
We are currently working on the sub-problem of identifying the
gender of named human entities in textbooks in the absence of
clear linguistic markers of gender such as ’sister’, ’himself’, etc. Our
methodology is based on leveraging contextual data in the form of
phrase vectors, along with sentence structure.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems → Information extraction; Clustering and
classification; • Applied computing → Education;

KEYWORDS
Textbooks, Human Language Technology, Web resource mining

REFERENCES
[1] Rakesh Agrawal, Sreenivas Gollapudi, Krishnaram Kenthapadi, Nitish Srivastava,
and Raja Velu. 2010. Enriching textbooks through data mining. In Proceedings of
the First ACM Symposium on Computing for Development. 19.
[2] Tolga Bolukbasi, Kai-Wei Chang, James Y Zou, Venkatesh Saligrama, and Adam T
Kalai. 2016. Man is to computer programmer as woman is to homemaker?
debiasing word embeddings. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
4349–4357.
[3] Sahar Changuel, Nicolas Labroche, and Bernadette Bouchon-Meunier. 2015. Resources Sequencing Using Automatic Prerequisite–Outcome Annotation. ACM
Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST) 6, 1 (2015), 6.
[4] International Monetary Fund. 2015. World Economic Outlook: Uneven Growth Short and Long-Term Factors.
[5] Jackie FK Lee. 2014. A hidden curriculum in Japanese EFL textbooks: Gender
representation. Linguistics and Education 27 (2014), 39–53.
[6] Jackie FK Lee and Peter Collins. 2010. Construction of gender: A comparison of
Australian and Hong Kong English language textbooks. Journal of Gender Studies
19, 2 (June 2010), 121–137.
[7] Falk Pingel. 2010. UNESCO Guidebook on Textbook Research and Textbook Revision.
UNESCO.
[8] Amal Zouaq and Roger Nkambou. 2008. Building domain ontologies from text
for educational purposes. IEEE Transactions on learning technologies 1, 1 (2008),
49–62.

Research Question 2. How can we enhance the learning experience of a student through an optimal ordering of concepts, and
ensure the coverage of all necessary topics?
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’18, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
© 2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5657-2/18/07.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210228

1465

