Workshop

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information
Retrieval and Natural Language Processing
for Digital Libraries (BIRNDL 2018)
Muthu Kumar Chandrasekaran

Kokil Jaidka

Philipp Mayr

School of Computing,
National University of Singapore, Singapore
muthu.chandra@comp.nus.edu.sg

School of Arts & Sciences,
University of Pennsylvania, USA
jaidka@sas.upenn.edu

GESIS – Leibniz Institute for the Social
Sciences, Germany
philipp.mayr@gesis.org

ABSTRACT

by catalyzing new ideas and collaborations and facilitating knowledge transfer. A recent description of the symbiotic relationship
that exists among bibliometrics, IR and NLP has been presented by
Wolfram [8]. The highlights of SIGIR-17’s BIRNDL workshop were
published in SIGIR Forum [3].
The goal of the BIRNDL workshop at SIGIR 2018 is to engage
the IR community about the open problems in Big Sciences. Big
Science refers to the large, cross-domain digital repositories which
index research papers, such as the ACL Anthology, ArXiv, ACM
Digital Library, PubMed, IEEE database, Web of Science and Google
Scholar. Currently, digital libraries collect and allow access to digital papers and their metadata—inclusive of citations—but mostly
do not analyze the items they index. The scale of scholarly publications poses a challenge for scholars in their search for relevant
literature. Finding relevant scholarly literature is the key focus of
the workshop and sets the agenda for tools and approaches to be
discussed and evaluated at BIRNDL.
The 3r d BIRNDL workshop1 and 4t h CL-SciSumm Shared Task
will be a follow-up to the 2nd BIRNDL workshop2 and 3r d CLSciSumm Shared Task, co-located with SIGIR 2017, where 7 research
papers and 9 system papers were presented3 [3]. The keynote by Simone Teufel (University of Cambridge, UK) discussed how citation
links and entailment can be applied to answer global scientometric
questions [7]. The Shared Task generated a lot of interest and participation, and all proponents strongly favored a follow-up this year.
The main organizers have regularly been coordinating workshop series at premier IR and IS venues - such as the Bibliometric-enhanced
Information Retrieval (BIR) workshops in 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017
[4] and 2018 at ECIR and the NLPIR4DL workshop at ACL-IJCNLP
(2009). In 2018, the BIRNDL workshop plans to take this legacy
forward with a special focus on scholarly publications and new
datasets, and an updated scientific summarization Shared Task for
its participants.
Papers and talks at the workshop will incorporate insights from
IR, NLP and bibliometrics to develop new techniques to address
the open problems in scholarly digital libraries and studying impact of big science, such as evidence-based searching, measurement
of research quality, relevance and impact, the emergence and decline of research problems, identification of scholarly relationships
and influences and applied problems such as language translation,
question-answering and summarization. We will also address the
need for established, standardized baselines, evaluation metrics and

The large scale of scholarly publications poses a challenge for
scholars in information seeking and sensemaking. Information
retrieval (IR), bibliometric and natural language processing (NLP)
techniques could enhance scholarly search, retrieval and user experience but are not yet widely used. To this purpose, we propose
the third iteration of the Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced
Information Retrieval and Natural Language Processing for Digital
Libraries (BIRNDL) [1, 3]. The workshop is intended to stimulate
IR, NLP researchers and Digital Library professionals to elaborate
on new approaches in natural language processing, information
retrieval, scientometrics, text mining and recommendation techniques that can advance the state-of-the-art in scholarly document
understanding, analysis, and retrieval at scale. The BIRNDL workshop will incorporate multiple invited talks, paper sessions, a poster
session and the 4th edition of the Computational Linguistics (CL)
Scientific Summarization Shared Task.
ACM Reference format:
Muthu Kumar Chandrasekaran, Kokil Jaidka, and Philipp Mayr. 2018. Joint
Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and Natural
Language Processing for Digital Libraries (BIRNDL 2018). In Proceedings
of The 41st International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research & Development
in Information Retrieval, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, July 8–12, 2018 (SIGIR ’18),
4 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210194

1

INTRODUCTION

Over the past several years and at major conferences for information retrieval (IR) research, the BIRNDL workshops [1, 3] and its
parent workshops have been establishing themselves as the primary
interdisciplinary venue for cross-pollination of natural language
processing (NLP), IR and bibliometrics research. The workshop series is motivated by the observation that while the membership in
either community shares only a partial overlap the main discourse
in both fields consist of different approaches to solve similar problems. A common forum for discussion benefits both communities,
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR ’18, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
© 2018 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5657-2/18/07. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210194

1 http://wing.comp.nus.edu.sg/birndl-sigir2018/
2 http://wing.comp.nus.edu.sg/birndl-sigir2017/
3 http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1888/

1415

and http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-2002/

Workshop

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

• Authors should describe potential uses and applications of
the dataset, but any sophisticated analysis can be a regular
paper submission.

test collections. Towards the purpose of evaluating tools and technologies developed for digital libraries, we will organize the 4t h
CL-SciSumm Shared Task– based on the CL-SciSumm corpus, comprising over 500 computational linguistics research papers, interlinked through a citation network. In this iteration of CL-SciSumm,
we are adding to our existing organization team and also nearly
doubling the size of our existing dataset.
This workshop will be relevant to scholars in computer and
information science, specialized in IR and NLP. It will also be of
importance for all stakeholders in the publication pipeline: implementers, publishers and policymakers. Today’s publishers continue
to provide new ways to support their consumers in disseminating
and retrieving the right published works to their audience. Formal
citation metrics are increasingly a factor in decision-making by
universities and funding bodies worldwide, making the need for
research in applying these metrics more pressing.

2

2.1

Tentative Schedule of Events

BIRNDL 2018 will have a similar schedule as BIRNDL 2017 at SIGIR.
The workshop will start with a keynote titled “Semi-Automating
Biomedical Evidence Synthesis via Machine Learning and Natural
Language Processing” by Prof. Byron Wallace (Northeastern University) followed by regular research paper presentations. The Shared
Task overview and selected presentations of the participating teams
in the Shared Task will follow. In a poster session other participants
of the Shared Task and papers deemed more suited for a poster
than a presentation will be invited to display a poster or demo their
system. The workshop will end with a planning and discussion
session to decide on further directions and enhancements to the
workshop and the Shared Task.

WORKSHOP TOPICS AND FORMAT

2.2

Our goal is to encourage insights from IR, NLP and computational
linguistics for scholarly document understanding, document analysis and retrieval in digital libraries. We invite stimulating submissions on topics including – but not limited to – full-text analysis,
multimedia and multilingual analysis and alignment as well as the
application of citation-based NLP, information retrieval and information seeking techniques in digital libraries. Specific examples of
fields of interests include (but are not limited to):

The CL-SciSumm Shared Task

The 4t h Computational Linguistics (CL) Scientific Summarization
Shared Task4 is sponsored by Microsoft Research Asia and will
be conducted as a part of this workshop. This is the first mediumscale shared task on scientific document summarization in the
computational linguistics domain. It follows up on and extends
the corpus sizes of the successful CL Shared Task conducted as a
part of the BIRNDL workshops in 2017, 2016 and the Pilot Task
conducted as a part of the BiomedSumm Track at the Text Analysis
Conference 2014 (TAC 2014) [2]. In the CL-SciSumm 2017 Shared
Task, 15 teams signed up, and nine teams ultimately submitted and
presented their results.
The Shared Task comprises three sub-tasks in automatic research
paper summarization on a new corpus of research papers, as described below.
Given: A topic consisting of a Reference Paper (RP) and 10 or
more Citing Papers (CPs) that all contain citations to the RP. In each
CP, the text spans (i.e., citances) have been identified that pertain
to a particular citation to the RP.

• Infrastructures for scientific text mining and IR,
• Semantic and network-based indexing, navigation, searching
and browsing in structured data,
• Information extraction and parsing tasks in scientific papers,
• Population of a science knowledge base and performing
inference on it,
• Bibliometrics, citation analysis and network analysis for IR,
• Discourse structure identification and argument mining from
scientific papers,
• Summarization and question-answering for scholarly DLs,
• Recommendation for scholarly papers, reviewers, citations
and publication venues,
• Measurement and evaluation of quality and impact,
• Metadata and controlled vocabularies for resource description and discovery; automatic metadata discovery, such as
language identification,
• Disambiguation issues in scholarly DLs using NLP or IR
techniques; data cleaning and data quality.

• Task 1a: For each citance, identify the spans of text (cited
text spans) in the RP that most accurately reflect the citance.
These are of the granularity of a sentence fragment, a full
sentence, or several consecutive sentences (no more than 5).
• Task 1b: For each cited text span, identify what facet of the
paper it belongs to, from a predefined set of facets.
• Task 2 (optional bonus task): Finally, generate a structured
summary of the RP from the cited text spans of the RP. The
length of the summary should not exceed 250 words. Evaluation: Task 1 will be scored by overlap of text spans measured by number of sentences in the system output vs gold
standard. Task 2 will be scored using the ROUGE family of
metrics between the system output, and i) human summaries,
ii) community summaries comprising the cited text spans,
and ii) the Abstract section of the reference paper.

Additionally, this year we also invite dataset papers which describe new and pre-existing data resources. This is to address the
other challenge in bibliometrics research – the scarcity of validated
datasets for problem solving, benchmarking and evaluation. Dataset
paper submissions must comprise:
• The data itself – organized as a single dataset or a group of
datasets, and
• Metadata which describes data collection and processing
methods, documentation of the structure and descriptive
statistics about the content and quality of the dataset.

The CL-SciSumm corpus comprises a training corpus of forty
topics and a test corpus of ten topics. Each topic comprises ACL
4 http://wing.comp.nus.edu.sg/cl-scisumm2018/

1416

Workshop

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

• 3r d Workshop on Argumentation Mining at ACL 2016. This
related workshop is synergistic and complementary. We overlap to a small extent in being interested in argumentation
(their workshop) in scientific documents (our workshop).

Computational Linguistics research papers, and their citing papers
and three output summaries each. The three output summaries
comprise: human summaries, faceted summaries of the traditional
self-summary (the abstract) and the community summary (the collection of citation sentences or citances) [6]. For the 2018 Shared
Task, our team is joining hands with the Language, Information
and Learning at Yale (LILY) group at Yale University. We have also
enriched our dataset by nearly doubling the size of our corpus and
incorporating metadata from the ACL Anthology Network (AAN)5
This task is expected to be of interest to a broad community
including those working in CL and NLP, especially in the subdisciplines of text summarization, discourse structure in scholarly
discourse, paraphrase, textual entailment and text simplification.

3

4

OUTLOOK

This workshop is a next step to foster a reflection on interdisciplinarity, and the benefits that the disciplines Bibliometrics, IR and
NLP can derive from it in a digital libraries context. As an output
of BIRNDL 2016, we published a special issue on “Bibliometrics,
Information Retrieval and Natural Language Processing in Digital
Libraries” in the International Journal on Digital Libraries [5]. Another special issue on “Bibliometric-enhanced Information retrieval
and Scientometrics” is in preparation for the Scientometrics journal.
In the future, we plan to continue this series of workshops and
Shared Tasks at prominent IR, NLP and Digital Libraries venues.
Since 2016 we maintain the “Bibliometric-enhanced-IR Bibliography” 6 which collects scientific papers which appear in collaboration with the BIR/BIRNDL organizers.

RELATED WORKSHOPS

Our workshop is a continuation of several previous ones on similar topics. We present a summary of some relevant recent events,
which underpin our claim of the workshop topic being spot-on and
relevant.
The following related workshops (NLPIR4DL, BIR, CLBib and the
CL Summarization Pilot Task) have been organized by the BIRNDL
proposers.

5

ORGANIZING COMMITTEE

Philipp Mayr is a deputy department head and a team leader at
the GESIS – Leibniz-Institute for the Social Sciences department
Knowledge Technologies for the Social Sciences (WTS). Philipp
Mayr received his PhD in applied informetrics and information
retrieval from the Berlin School of Library and Information Science
at Humboldt University Berlin in 2009. To date, he has been awarded
substantial research funding (PI, Co-PI) from national and European
funding agencies. Philipp has published in top conferences and
prestigious journals in the areas informetrics, information retrieval
and digital libraries. His research group focuses on methods and
techniques for interactive information retrieval. Philipp was the
main organizer of the Combining Bibliometrics and Information
Retrieval at ISSI 2013, the BIR workshops at ECIR 2014, 2015, 2016,
2017 and 2018 and the BIRNDL workshops at JCDL 2016 and SIGIR
2017. More info: https://philippmayr.github.io/.
Kokil Jaidka is a postdoctoral researcher in Computer Science
and Chief Technology Officer for the World Wellbeing Project at
the University of Pennsylvania. She has been the lead coordinator of all aspects of the CL-SciSumm Shared Task since 2014, and
she also co-organized the 1st BIRNDL workshop. She has expertise working on large datasets using machine learning and unsupervised approaches on textual data, and in the specific areas of
multi-document summarization and applied linguistics. She is a
reviewer for ACL, JCDL, Scientometrics, Applied Linguistics and
Aslib journal of Information Processing & Management. Her PhD
dissertation involved the development of a literature review framework for the summarization of research papers. Currently, she is
applying computational methods on social media data for opinion
mining, behavioral profiling and modeling health outcomes.
Muthu Kumar Chandrasekaran is broadly interested in natural language processing, machine learning and their applications
to information retrieval; specifically, in retrieving and organising

• 1st Workshop on text and citation analysis for scholarly
digital libraries (NLPIR4DL) was held in conjunction with
ACL-IJCNLP 2009, Singapore. It comprised 11 full papers
(acceptance rate: 21%).
• 7th Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval (BIR2018) at ECIR 2018. The focus of the BIR workshops at ECIR (2014, 2015, 2016, 2017 and 2018) was on research papers in information retrieval, information seeking,
science modelling, network analysis, and digital libraries,
applying insights from bibliometrics, scientometrics, and
informetrics.
• 2nd Workshop on Mining Scientific Papers: Computational
Linguistics and Bibliometrics (CLBib) at ISSI 2017 brought
together researchers to study the ways Bibliometrics can
benefit from large-scale text analytics and sense mining of
scientific papers, thus exploring the interdisciplinarity of
Bibliometrics and NLP.
• The Computational Linguistics Pilot Task, held as a part of
the Biomedical Summarization track, at TAC 2014 [2], where
the results from 3 system papers were presented.
The following workshops have been organized by other research
groups.
• 6th Workshop on Mining Scientific Publications (WOSP) at
JCDL 2017. This workshop series is co-located with the JCDL
and tries to leverage the potential of text and data mining
technologies to improve the process of how research is done.
• Scholarly Big Data: AI Perspectives, Challenges, and Ideas at
AAAI 2016 and IJCAI 2016. This workshop series is related to
our topics and reflects many of the same Program Committee
members. It indicates a high degree of interest for our topic,
and will be synergistic due to its complementary date.

6 https://github.com/PhilippMayr/Bibliometric-enhanced-IR_Bibliography/

5 http://clair.eecs.umich.edu/aan/index.php

1417

Workshop

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

• Anita de Waard, Elsevier Labs, USA
• Stephen Wan, CSIRO ICT Centre, Australia

information from asynchronous conversation media such as scholarly publications, discussion and debate forums. He has been coorganizing the CL-SciSumm Shared Task series and the BIRNDL
workshop series since 2014. He also reviews for ACL, EMNLP,
NAACL and JCDL conferences. He believes communication of
scholarly research needs to be summarized to avoid redundant or
outdated research and ensure faster progress to pressing problems.
He is currently doing his Ph.D. research on a similarly motivated
problem on Massive Open Online Course (MOOC) discussion forums on recommending salient student discussions for instructors
to intervene given their limited bandwidth.

6

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Microsoft Research Asia for their generous support in funding the
development, dissemination and organization of the CL-SciSumm dataset
and the Shared Task. We immensely thank Prof. Dragomir Radev and Michihiro Yasunaga from Yale University for co-organising CL-Scisumm with
us this time. We are also grateful to the co-organizers of the 1s t BIRNDL
workshop - Guillaume Cabanac, Ingo Frommholz, Min-Yen Kan and Dietmar
Wolfram, for their continued support and involvement.

REFERENCES

PROGRAM COMMITTEE

[1] Guillaume Cabanac, Muthu Kumar Chandrasekaran, Ingo Frommholz, Kokil
Jaidka, Min-Yen Kan, Philipp Mayr, and Dietmar Wolfram. 2016. Report on the
Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and Natural
Language Processing for Digital Libraries (BIRNDL 2016). SIGIR Forum 50, 2
(2016), 36–43. http://sigir.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/p036.pdf
[2] Kokil Jaidka, Muthu Kumar Chandrasekaran, Beatriz Fisas Elizalde, Rahul Jha,
Christopher Jones, Min-Yen Kan, Ankur Khanna, Diego Molla-Aliod, Dragomir R
Radev, Francesco Ronzano, et al. 2014. The computational linguistics summarization pilot task. In Proceedings of Text Analysis Conference. Gaithersburg, USA.
[3] Philipp Mayr, Muthu Kumar Chandrasekaran, and Kokil Jaidka. 2017. Report on
the Joint Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval and Natural
Language Processing for Digital Libraries (BIRNDL 2017). SIGIR Forum 51, 2
(2017), 107–113. http://sigir.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/p107.pdf
[4] Philipp Mayr, Ingo Frommholz, and Guillaume Cabanac. 2017. Report on the 5th
International Workshop on Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval (BIR
2017). SIGIR Forum 51, 1 (2017), 29–35. http://sigir.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/
06/p029.pdf
[5] Philipp Mayr, Ingo Frommholz, Guillaume Cabanac, Muthu Kumar Chandrasekaran, Kokil Jaidka, Min-Yen Kan, and Dietmar Wolfram. 2017. Introduction
to the Special Issue on Bibliometric-Enhanced Information Retrieval and Natural
Language Processing for Digital Libraries (BIRNDL). International Journal on
Digital Libraries (2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00799-017-0230-x
[6] Preslav I Nakov, Ariel S Schwartz, and Marti Hearst. 2004. Citances: Citation
sentences for semantic analysis of bioscience text. In Proceedings of the SIGIR’04
workshop on Search and Discovery in Bioinformatics. 81–88.
[7] Simone Teufel. 2017. Do "Future Work" sections have a purpose? Citation links
and entailment for global scientometric questions. In Proc. of the 2nd BIRNDL
Workshop at SIGIR 2017. 7–13. http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1888/paper1.pdf
[8] Dietmar Wolfram. 2016. Bibliometrics, Information Retrieval and Natural Language Processing: Natural Synergies to Support Digital Library Research. In Proc.
of the BIRNDL Workshop 2016. 6–13. http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1610/paper1.pdf

Below, we list the confirmed committee members who have stated
their support to review submissions to the workshop at SIGIR 2017.
We plan to have three reviews for each BIRNDL submission.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Akiko Aizawa, National Inst. of Informatics, Japan
Waleed Ammar, Allen Inst. for Artificial Intelligence, USA
Iana Atanassova, Universite de Franche-Comte, France
Colin Batchelor, Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge, UK
Joeran Beel, University of Konstanz, Germany
Patrice Bellot, Aix-Marseille University, France
Marc Bertin, Univ. Claude Bernard Lyon 1, France
Chandra Bhagavatula, Allen Inst. for Artificial Intelligence,
USA
Katarina Boland, GESIS, Germany
Arman Cohan, Georgetown University, USA
Anita Dewaard, Elsevier, USA
Ed A. Fox, Virginia Tech, USA
Norbert Fuhr, University of Duisburg-Essen, Germany
Lee Giles, Penn State University, USA
Pawan Goyal, Indian Institute of Technology, India
Wolfgang Glaenzel, KU Leuven, Belgium
Gilles Hubert, University of Toulouse, France
Dain Kaplan, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Japan
Roman Kern, Graz University of Technology, Austria
Atsushi Keyaki, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo, Japan
Cyril Labbe, Univ. Grenoble Alpes, France
Birger Larsen, Aalborg University Copenhagen, Denmark
John Lawrence, University of Dundee, UK
Marie-Francine Moens, KU Leuven, Belgium
Stasa Milojevic, Indiana University, USA
Preslav Nakov, Qatar Comp. Research Inst., Qatar
Manabu Okumura, Tokyo Inst. of Technology, Japan
Byung-won On, Kunsan National University
Cecile Paris, CSIRO, Australia
Ameni Sahraoui, GESIS, Germany
Philipp Schaer, TH Koeln, Germany
Andrea Scharnhorst, DANS, the Netherlands
Vivek Kumar Singh, Banaras Hindu University, India
Kazunari Sugiyama, National Univ. of Singapore, Singapore
Pradeep Teregowda, IBM, Watson Discovery Services, USA
Simone Teufel, University of Cambridge, UK
Mike Thelwall, University of Wolverhampton, UK
Bart Thijs, KU Leuven, Belgium
Lucy Vanderwende, Microsoft Research, USA

1418

