Keynote

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Salton Award Keynote
Information Interaction in Context
Kalervo Järvelin
University of Tampere
Tampere, FI-33014, Finland
kalervo.jarvelin@uta.fi
I was exposed to ideas by Gernot Wersig (Informationssoziologie),
Nick Belkin (the ASK hypothesis), Brenda Dervin (sense-making
theory), and D. C. Engelbart (human augmentation research).
These led me to view Information Science as a discipline studying
people as actors in their work/life – not as users of some information delivery institutions per se, nor as information seekers per
se, but as subjects perceiving their own information environment
and interacting with it. At the University of Tampere, we pursued
this line of research and contributed to the international debate on
the transformation of Information Science from institution focus
to person / information practises focus.

CCS Concepts/ACM Classifiers
• Information systems~Users and interactive retrieval
• Information systems~Evaluation of retrieval results

Author Keywords
Interactive information retrieval, Information behavior

ABSTRACT1
Let me begin by saying how honored I am to receive the Gerard
Salton Award from SIGIR. I only had the chance to meet Professor
Salton once in person, at SIGIR’91 in Chicago, where he invited me
as a visiting scholar to Cornell. I could not do that then but had
been inspired by his great pioneering work on automatic information retrieval (IR) and the SMART system. He could well have
pushed me to a more system-oriented path within IR than the one
I actually followed. I’m also humbled by the honour of having
been chosen to stand among the previous 11 recipients of this
award whose contributions to IR are of greatest value. Honestly, I
never believed that I would be giving this talk.

Alongside Carol C. Kuhlthau’s work on the Information Seeking
Process in learning tasks, theoretical reflections led me to think
that task complexity affects information seeking. In particular,
tasks of different complexity require different types of knowledge
to be solved, which may be constructed from information available
in different types of sources. Quite self-evident once stated, but not
that simple to study. Task complexity as a factor in information
interaction got quite popular, however. Others have extended its
application in IR and seeking studies, e.g. by proposing taxonomies
of work tasks and search tasks.

As the tradition is, based on several examples by prior Salton
Award winners, I’d like to present today a personal reflection on
IR. I will begin with some personal history in Information Science
and IR and continue by discussing my personal view on the goals
and scope of IR. Then I’d like to present some studies seeking to
approach those goals and discuss their methodological challenges.

Following the rise of test-collection based IR research, we established our IR Lab and the research group FIRE in the beginning of
1990’s. The IR community focused then on developing ranked retrieval systems that scale up to handling large collections. That
research was without doubt very important and successful. Still
we thought that a broader user-oriented scope would be beneficial
to the field. To advance this, we thought, one needs credibility
earned through becoming a full member of the community –
through carrying out successful research with similar goals. In addition to making use of the TReC test collections, we decided to
build a Finnish language test collection. This had two important
benefits: one in the development of NLP methods for IR, and the
other in the comeback of graded relevance assessments in IR evaluation. The former led us to quite successful in research into applications of NLP methods in IR across a range of languages; crosslanguage IR using a range of approaches across a range of language pairs; and approximate string matching methods for searching with words not covered by other approaches.

I came to the field of IR through Information Science. I started at
the University of Tampere aiming at a degree in librarianship.
However, I was soon introduced to IR, information behaviour and
Information Science through inspiring books by Wilfrid Lancaster,
Gerard Salton, and Manfred Kochen. My professor also advised me
to study Computer Science, which led me to research on database
management systems. Within Information Science, the subfield of
user and information needs studies was seen to offer a scientific
foundation for the development of libraries. The vast majority of
the studies were user studies, or institution-centred studies, focusing on the role of users in the life of libraries.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full
citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must
be honored. For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.
SIGIR '18, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
© 2018 Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5657-2/18/07.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210230

The latter inspired the development of evaluation metrics based on
graded relevance assessments – the Cumulated Gain metrics family, foremost the nDCG metric. We proposed it as a user-oriented
metric because it was based on graded relevance, allowed weighing of relevance levels and discounting the gain incurring from
documents found late on the result list. There are quite a few pro-

1

Keynote

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

the other activity types. When this is coupled with task complexity,
one may infer that more pervasive automation is possible or desirable in simpler tasks. However, complex task processes would
need to remain under human control.

posals extending the basic metric in various ways. Nevertheless,
(n)(D)CG was and is used as a metric for single ranking evaluation
in experimental IR. Such evaluation is most typically carried out
without users (other than indirectly as relevance judges) with the
primary goal of improving ranking.

Several past recipients of the Salton Award have stressed the importance of people in IR research. Technologies change and transform work and everyday life contexts, and the associated information interaction practises. However, the phenomena stay so
we’d better study them in order to best design and utilize technology support. Thank you all for contributing to this effort and the
award I received.

However, when human searchers have been incorporated in evaluation studies, the results have often suggested that better ranking
does not necessarily lead to better search task / work task performance. Therefore it is not clear, which system or interface affordances should be developed to improve the effectiveness of
human task performance. It is insufficient to incorporate human
‘users’, even less simulated ones, as devices producing relevance
feedback signal in IR experiments. A broader context is needed.
This idea was developed theoretically further in the joint book
‘The Turn’ (2005), with Peter Ingwersen, which aimed to integrate
Information Seeking and IR (IS&R) research.
Simultaneously there was taking place a transformation within the
search engine industry, focusing on the behaviour of their users as
the key source of signal for improved ranking, recommendation,
and placement of ads. This meant extensive server-side logging of
user behaviour in a single search engine context. The analysis of
logs has led to significant improvements in user-system interaction. Still, this approach has a limited take on people interacting
with information in their work and everyday life contexts, which
offer multiple information sources, services and systems. To learn
about that one needs to study people in their own contexts.
In approaching the people context I was inspired by the book ‘Laboratory Life’ (by B. Latour and S. Woolgar, 1986), which describes
what is going on in a biological research laboratory, using ethnographic methods. Consequently, in several projects, we went to
work places in the patent domain, in molecular medicine, in social
work / child protection, and in public/business administration,
mapping information environments, interviewing people, observing, photographing, and logging their information interaction. We
obtained a rich picture of: how IS&R is coupled with larger task
processes; how people collaborate on both; integrated use of multiple information sources and systems which was more intense in
complex tasks; how barriers made system limitations visible and
caused workarounds; and what kind of searching was used for
solving information problems in various contexts.

BIOGRAPHY
Kalervo “Kal” Järvelin (http://people.uta.fi/~likaja) is Professor
Emeritus of Information Retrieval at the Faculty of Communication Sciences, University of Tampere, Finland. He was Academy
Professor, Academy of Finland, in 2004–09. His research covers
information seeking and retrieval, linguistic and conceptual methods in IR, IR evaluation, analysis of Information Science, and database management. Kal is best known for his work on information
seeking and IR evaluation, the normalized Discounted Cumulative
Gain (nDCG) metric in particular (co-authored with Dr. Jaana
Kekäläinen). He received the Tony Kent Strix Award 2008 and the
ASIS&T Research Award 2012 for contributions to IR and Information Science; and the SIGIR Test of Time Award 2017 for the
seminal paper on the nDCG metric.

We proposed a framework based on Program Theory for the study
of Task-Based Information Interaction (TBII) which is understood
as behavioral and cognitive activities related to task planning and
monitoring, searching information items, selecting between them,
working with them, and synthesizing and reporting the outcome.
We do not have enough systematic knowledge on real-life information interaction within these activities. Coupling the activity
types with Marcia Bates’ ideas on “where should the person stop
and the information [interaction – KJ] interface start“ suggests
questions on whether we know, what kind of support exists, is
used, desirable, or possible in each activity. Bates proposed a classification of progressive system involvement at various abstraction
levels of searching, e.g,, listing options, performing actions on demand, and automatic execution. Similar analysis can be applied to

The contributions leading to Salton Award are rarely a solo
achievement. Therefore I’d like to take this opportunity to thank
my students and colleagues at home and abroad, in particular the
FIRE Research Group on IR at the University of Tampere.

2

Keynote

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

3

