Short Research Papers II

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Identifying and Modeling Information Resumption Behaviors in
Cross-Device Search
Dan Wu

Wuhan University
Wuhan 430072
China
woodan@whu.edu.cn

Jing Dong

Wuhan University
Wuhan 430072
China
dj_whu@163.com

Yuan Tang

Wuhan University
Wuhan 430072
China
1309396929@qq.com

same web pages [2]. Moreover, repeated queries and revisited
web pages were found more at the beginning than in the middle
and ending of a posterior session [3]. Han et al. found re-finding
was an important component in cross-device search patterns [4].
These behaviors are referred as task resumption behaviors,
which purpose to re-find the task/topic. The idea of information
resumption behaviors in cross-device search is enlightened by
task resumption behaviors in cross-session search. It is
considered that information resumption behaviors will occur in
post-switch session when there is re-finding in a cross-device
search. Re-finding indicates the task/topic is searched repeatedly
across sessions, rather than only repeated queries.
Overall, our research questions are as follows: (1) Is it
possible to identify information resumption behaviors in postswitch session of cross-device search? (2) What are important
features of information resumption behaviors in cross-device
search? In order to answer them, a within-subject experiment
was designed to explore the information resumption in the
cross-device search.

ABSTRACT
Enlightened 1 by task resumption behaviors in cross-session
search, we explore information resumption behaviors in crossdevice search. In order to find important features of information
resumption behaviors, we conducted a user experiment and
modeled information resumption behaviors using machine
learning. The model of C5.0 Decision Tree outperformed and
showed that features of FamiliarityScores, AveEditDistance,
AveQueryEffectiveRate and ValidClickRate are of importance.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems → Information retrieval → Query
log analysis • Human computer interaction → User models;
User studies

KEYWORDS
information seeking behavior; information resumption; crossdevice search; information retrieval; information behavior
modeling

2 CROSS-DEVICE SEARCH EXPERIMENT

ACM Reference format:

2.1 Experiment Settings

D. Wu, J. Dong, and Y. Tang. 2018. Identifying and Modeling Information
Resumption Behaviors in Cross-Device Search. In Proceedings of ACM
SIGIR conference, Ann Arbor, Michigan USA, July 2018 (SIGIR’18), 4 pages.

Considering that it takes time to switch devices in cross-device
search of real situation, we set a time interval of device
transition to be an interruption, which also inspired users to refind the task. The way of device transition was preset and there
were only two directions including D-M (desktop-to-mobile) and
M-D (mobile-to-desktop). The user experiment was conducted in
a controlled laboratory environment. We provided a laptop and
users were expected to use their own smart phones for the
mobile search.
Cross-device Access and Fusion Engine (CAFÉ), a selfdeveloped search system, was used to perform both desktop and
mobile search. Referring to the cross-device search system
developed by Han et al. [5], the context-sensitive retrieval model
is adopted in CAFÉ. The system provides users with search
results by re-ranking results of Bing based on context
information of mobile touch interaction (MTI) and viewing time.
In addition, the system can remind users of URLs clicked
previously by showing information of the previous device,
search time and queries. The search engine result page (SERP) of
CAFÉ system can be seen in Figure 1. Different areas of the SERP
are labelled.

1 INTRODUCTION
Searching across sessions is inevitable during a cross-device
search. Previous studies of cross-session search found that users
have to remember the information searched in anterior sessions
in order to recover the search task during posterior sessions [1].
Tyler and Teevan showed that users recovered their previous
query status by submitting repeated queries and re-viewing the
1

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned
by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To
copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from
Permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR '18, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
© 2018 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5657-2/18/07…$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210126

1189

Short Research Papers II

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

device search frequency as over 3 (5-level Likert scale). We
reached an agreement on privacy protection with them and paid
unequally from 100 to 150 yuan to have them searched seriously.

2.2 Cross-device Search Tasks

2.4 Experiment Procedure
Every user had to complete two tasks by two device transition
ways. For each task, both desktop and mobile device were used
and users were allowed to spend at most 20 minutes on each
device. We required users to search all tasks on the first device
search (session 1) and then on the second device (session 2),
which led to an interval for the same task. In order to be sure
every task could not be fulfilled by a few queries in a single
session, we did a pilot search and the result showed the tasks
were too complex to be completed in 20 minutes. Users were
allowed to rest for 20 minutes after finishing all session 1,
avoiding fatigue influences search behaviors. Therefore, the
interval between two sessions of a task was 40 minutes. During
the 20 minutes of each session, users needed not only to search
information but also to give multi-level relevance judgement
(irrelevant, generally relevant and highly relevant) for each
clicked document and save useful information for the report.
Moreover, after the search of session 1, users were asked “What
subtasks did you search?”, “How familiar do you feel with each
subtask? (5-level Likert scale)?” and “How satisfied do you feel
about the current session? (5-level Likert scale)”. These questions
would be asked again when users finished the search of session 2.
We take User 1 for example, as seen in Figure 3. User 1 was
told his tasks were Movie and Drama. He searched Movie on
desktop first (session 1 of Movie) and then Drama on mobile
(session 1 of Drama). After answering questions mentioned above
for both tasks, User 1 was allowed to take a break for 20 minutes.
Then, User 1 resumed Movie search on mobile (session 2 of Movie)
and Drama on desktop (session 2 of Drama) in sequences. And
questions were required to answer again.

Figure 1: SERP of CAFÉ System

Figure 2: Task Example
We considered complex search tasks in the experiment, as
complex information need cannot be easily satisfied by a single
session and device. Liu and Li found that the task type and
subtask amount have effect on the complexity of task [6]. Thus,
we designed four subtasks for each task. To determine task
topics, we asked the frequent categories searched across devices
in everyday life by the participant recruitment survey and
selected the top four, which were Movie, Drama, Music and
Language. To avoid the effect of task type, we designed four
topics all as informational tasks. A task example is shown in
Figure 2. We rotated the orders of tasks based on topics using
Latin Squares and asked users to search the first task by D-M
and the second task by M-D, which let every topic be searched
on both desktop and mobile.
The tasks were given to users in printed version to avoid
influence of viewing tasks on screen to their search behaviors. In
the description of each task, four subtasks were written in bold
and several instructions were given in italic. The instructions
were designed to help users generate clear information need.
Users were asked to submit a report for each task.

Figure 3: Experiment Procedure: An example of User1

2.5 Data Collection and Analysis Methods
In order to know whether the user re-find the task, we asked
what subtasks he/she searched respectively in session 1 and
session 2. By asking the familiarity and satisfaction of the search,
we collected the data of users’ cognition to the cross-device
search. The CAFÉ system was applied to both desktop and
mobile search. It can log SERP load time, SERP URL (including
coded queries), search device, interaction types, timestamps of
starting and stopping the interaction and areas of interactions.
The interactions on desktop indicate the movement of mouse,
including move, dwell and click, while the MTIs include drag
up/down/left/right, tap and press.
Over the entire procedure, every user searched 2 tasks and 4
sessions. In total, we collected search behavior data of 136

2.3 Participants
The participants of experiment were recruited among university
students. Electronic questionnaires were sent to students via email to investigate their backgrounds and cross-device search
experience. Finally, we recruited 34 users (22 females and 12
males), among which there were 18 undergraduates and 16
postgraduate students from 22 different majors. A third of them
self-estimated their search ability as over 4 and their cross-

1190

Short Research Papers II

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

sessions, of which 68 session 1 and 68 session 2. Since what
discusses in this paper is the information resumption behavior,
we only develop the model by the behavior data of 68 session 2.
Machine learning methods were used for data training and
modeling. We used SPSS Modeler 18.0 to run algorithms.

ValidClickRate
SatisfiedClickR
ate
DissatisfiedClic
kRate

3 MODELING INFORMATION RESUMPTION
BEHAVIORS

SerpTime

3.1 Dataset

LandingPageTi
me
FirstValidClick
Time

We identified information resumption behaviors by whether
there is re-finding in cross-device search. Answers of “What
subtasks did you search?” tell what subtasks the user searched in
session 1 and session 2. We consider users perform information
resumption if there is any subtask overlapping between session 1
and session 2. Table 1 shows that over 90% sessions include
information resumption behaviors. There is an obvious
imbalance of positive (sessions with information resumption
behaviors) and negative (sessions without information
resumption behaviors) samples. Therefore, we balanced all 68
sessions by the way of random over-sampling, which randomly
selected negative data to add minority class. The size of negative
samples was increased to three times and finally we got 80
sessions for modeling. Among the sessions, 70% of them (55
sessions) were used to train the model and the rest 30% (25
sessions) were used as the testing dataset.

FirstClickTime

SatisfactionSco
res
FamiliarityScor
es

0

1

2

3

4

The First Task/session

4

13

8

3

6

The Second Task/session

2

13

8

7

4

Percentage (%)

8.8

38.2

23.5

14.7

14.7

4 MODELING RESULTS

3.2 Features and Classifiers

We compared modeling results of three classifiers by classic
evaluation metrics of precision, recall, accuracy and F1 scores.
Results shown in Table 3 indicates C5.0 Decision Tree
significantly outperforms. Therefore, the model generated by
C5.0 Decision Tree, shown in Figure 4, is considered as the basis
for analyzing information resumption behaviors.
Four features are included in the model and have significant
effects on the information resumption behaviors. Weights of
these important features are summarized in Table 4, calculated
based on the p-value of F-test. It appears that the most important
feature is FamiliarityScores. It can be explained that long-term
exploration across different devices promotes users’
understanding of the task. Features related to the query
similarity (AveEditDistance) are also important, which indicates
that users may tend to resume the task by optimizing queries.
The experience of searching before the device transition has
users known more about the task, which provides the knowledge
to optimize queries. This explains why queries change
differently when participants resume the task. For example, to

Table 2: Features for Modeling

QueryNum
UniQueryNum
QueryChar
UniQueryChar
TermLength
AveQueryEffec
tive Rate
AveEditDistanc
e
JaccardSimilari
tyCoefficient

The interval of the first action and the first valid
click in session 2.
The interval of the first action and the first click
in session 2.
Context Group
User satisfaction with the task completion after
session 2.
User familiarity with the task after session 2.

We represented information resumption behaviors using
features of query, click, time and context groups, seeing in Table
2. Features of query group were extracted from CAFÉ system
logs based on previous studies of modeling cross-session search
[7]. The concept of valid click in click and time groups is referred
to the concept of result click proposed in reference [8]. The
satisfied and dissatisfied clicks were identified by the dwell time
on landing pages, taking reference to Fox et al. [8] and Sculley et
al. [9]. Features of context group came from the data of users’
cognition of the cross-device search mentioned in section 2.5.
In this study, three modeling methods of Binary Logistic
Regression (BLR), C5.0 Decision Tree (C5.0) and Support Vector
Machine (SVM) were used and Binary Logistic Regression was
the baseline, which was used the same as modeling cross-session
search [7].

Table 1: The Number of Sessions with/without
Information Resumption
Overlapped Subtask Number

Click Group
The proportion of valid click frequency in session
2.
The proportion of satisfied click frequency in
session 2.
The proportion of dissatisfied click frequency in
session 2.
Time Group
The total time on SERPs in session 2.
The total time on landing pages in session 2.

Query Group
The number of queries in session 2.
The number of unique queries session 2.
The number of characters include total queries
in session 2.
The number of characters in the unique query of
session 2.
The number of terms in queries of session 2.
The average rate of valid click of session 2.
The average similarity of queries in session 2,
which is referred as Levenshtein Distance.
The similarity of queries between session 1 and
session 2.

1191

Short Research Papers II

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

search introductions of new character players (the last subtask in
Figure 2), the participant searched who the players were in preswitch session and re-found this subtask by the names in postswitch session. Queries of two sessions were changed
dramatically. The optimized queries then help users acquire
useful information, which is reflected by the number of effective
queries (AveQueryEffectiveRate). Furthermore, ValidClickRate
indicates that users benefit from the searching in pre-switch
session. When users perform information resumption, their
clicks focus on result areas because the searching experience in
pre-switch session helps users to decide which result is relevant.

model suggest that behaviors of cognition, querying and clicking
should be considered in combination to support information
resumption behaviors. The important features indicate the query
diversity and click quality have effect on resuming the crossdevice search. Search service providers should attach importance
to optimizing query recommendation and search history
reminder functions when supporting cross-device search.

5 IMPLICATION AND CONCLUSION
Information resumption is a behavior in cross-device search, and
we identified four important features for modeling the behavior.
It is found that information resumption in post-switch session
benefits a lot from search experience of pre-switch session.
Information acquired before the device transition has an effect
on users’ information resumption behaviors, which promotes the
familiarity of topic, influences the query formulation and raises
the click quality. Although the data collection is conducted on a
self-developed search system, we believe these findings are
generalized to commercial search engines. Otherwise, there is no
denying that the small scale of sample due to collecting data by
user experiment can be a limitation. We used the method of
random over-sampling to balance and increase samples, however,
which may lead to an over-fitting issue. To overcome the issue,
the five-fold cross validation was applied. In future work, richer
prediction model and diverse features will be explored to better
predict the continuation task in the cross-device search.

Table 3: Comparison of Three Modeling Methods
Data

Train set

Method

BLR(bas
eline)

C5.0

TP
FP
TN
FN
Null
Precision
Recall
Accuracy
F1

38
0
13
0
4
1
1
1
1

42
0
13
0
0
1
1
1
1

Test set
SVM

BLR(bas
eline)

C5.0

SVM

37
0
13
1
4
1
0.9737
0.9808
0.9867

10
0
5
5
5
1
0.6667
0.75
0.8000

20
0
5
0
0
1
1
1
1

16
0
5
1
3
1
0.9412
0.9545
0.9697

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by National Natural Science
Foundation of China (Grant No. 71673204).

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]
[3]
[4]

[5]

Figure 4: Model of C5.0 Decision Tree

[6]

Table 4: Feature Weights

[7]

Feature
Group
Weight
FamiliarityScores
Context Group
0.33
AveEditDistance
Query Group
0.26
AveQueryEffectiveRate
Query Group
0.21
ValidClickRate
Click Group
0.21
Identifying information resumption behaviors and
understanding important features can be used to improve the
cross-device search experience in general. The findings of our

[8]
[9]

1192

J Teevan, E Adar, R Jones, MAS Potts. 2007. Information re-retrieval: repeat
queries in yahoo’s logs. In Proceeding of the 30th Annual International ACM
SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval
(SIGIR’07). ACM, New York, NY, 151-158.
S K Tyler, J Teevan. 2010. Large scale query log analysis of re-finding. In
Proceeding of the 3rd ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data
Mining (WSDM’10). ACM, New York, NY, 191-200.
S Han, Y Zhen, D He. 2015. Understanding and supporting cross-device web
search for exploratory tasks with mobile touch interactions. ACM
Transactions on Information Systems, 33(4), 1-34.
S Han, D He, Y Chi. 2017. Understanding and modeling behavior patterns in
cross‐device web search. In Proceedings of the 80th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Information Science and Technology (ASIS&T’17). Wiley,
150-158.
S Han, D He, Z Yue, P Brusilovsky. 2015. Supporting cross-device web search
with social navigation-based mobile touch interactions. In Proceeding of
International Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation, and Personalization.
Springer, Germany, 143-155.
P Liu, Z Li. 2012. Task complexity: a review and conceptualization framework.
International Journal of Industrial Ergonomics, 42(6), 553-568.
A Kotov, P N Bennett, R W White, S T Dumais, J Teevan. 2011. Modeling and
analysis of cross-session search tasks. In Proceeding of the 34th International
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval (SIGIR’11). ACM, New York, NY, 5-14.
S Fox, K Karnawat, M Mydland, S Dumais, T White. 2005. Evaluating implicit
measures to improve web search. ACM Transactions on Information Systems,
23(2), 147-168.
D Sculley, R G Malkin, S Basu, R J Bayardo. 2009. Predicting bounce rates in
sponsored search advertisements. In Proceeding of the 15th ACM
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
(SIGKDD’09). ACM, New York, NY, 1325-1334

