Workshop

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

SIGIR 2018 Workshop on Learning from Limited or Noisy Data
for Information Retrieval
Hamed Zamani

University of Massachusetts Amherst
zamani@cs.umass.edu

Mostafa Dehghani

University of Amsterdam
dehghani@uva.nl

Hang Li

Spotify
fdiaz@spotify.com

Nick Craswell

Toutiao AI Lab
lihang.lh@bytedance.com

Microsoft
nickcr@microsoft.com
IR problems, and the scalability required for IR tasks. Furthermore,
deep neural networks are widely known to require large amounts
of training data and the limitations in availability of this data in
many IR scenarios slow down the progress of machine learning
technologies in information retrieval.
The number of neural approaches to information retrieval tasks
has been significantly increased in the past few years (e.g., see the
proceedings of the SIGIR workshops Neural Information Retrieval
[1, 2]). However, many of these approaches have been limited to industry researchers, e.g., from Microsoft, Google, and Amazon, who
have access to large-scale training data. The academic community
and small companies still feel the lack of such data, which prevents
them to work on a set of cutting-edge technologies in information
retrieval. Even within industry, there are situations where data is
extremely limited; these include enterprise search, new or small
international markets or demographics, and personal search. In
addition, despite the usefulness of large datasets, they are often
gathered through implicit feedback from real users. This makes the
data highly biased, and thus learning models from noisy data has
become an unavoidable real-world problem in various applications.
Both academia and industry tackle a fundamental common problem:
how to learn from limited and/or noisy data for information retrieval
tasks?
Recent studies on learning to rank with labeled features [7], unbiased learning to rank [8, 9], neural ranking with weak supervision
[6], learning relevance-based word embedding [10], learning to
rank from samples of variable quality [3–5], and learning from multiple weak signals [11] demonstrate that substantial improvements
can be obtained by only having access to limited or noisy training
data or by employing an expert knowledge.
This workshop, called learning from limited or noisy data for
information retrieval (LND4IR), will focus on addressing such a
fundamental problem, which is not only limited to the deep neural
network approaches. We believe that this is a right direction that
the research IR community should take to be able to benefit from
the recent machine learning models.

ABSTRACT
In recent years, machine learning approaches, and in particular
deep neural networks, have yielded significant improvements on
several natural language processing and computer vision tasks;
however, such breakthroughs have not yet been observed in the
area of information retrieval. Besides the complexity of IR tasks,
such as understanding the user’s information needs, a main reason is the lack of high-quality and/or large-scale training data for
many IR tasks. This necessitates studying how to design and train
machine learning algorithms where there is no large-scale or highquality data in hand. Therefore, considering the quick progress in
development of machine learning models, this is an ideal time for a
workshop that especially focuses on learning in such an important
and challenging setting for IR tasks.
The goal of this workshop is to bring together researchers from
industry—where data is plentiful but noisy—with researchers from
academia—where data is sparse but clean to discuss solutions to
these related problems.
website: https://lnd4ir.github.io/
ACM Reference Format:
Hamed Zamani, Mostafa Dehghani, Fernando Diaz, Hang Li, and Nick
Craswell. 2018. SIGIR 2018 Workshop on Learning from Limited or Noisy
Data for Information Retrieval. In SIGIR ’18: The 41st International ACM
SIGIR Conference on Research & Development in Information Retrieval, July
8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210200

1

Fernando Diaz

MOTIVATION

Recent advancements in machine learning approaches, and in particular deep neural networks, have shown impressive performance
in various computer vision, speech recognition, and natural language processing tasks. In information retrieval (IR), however, such
big improvements have not yet been observed. This could be due to
several reasons, including the complexity of understanding and addressing the users’ information needs, the sparsity nature of many
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR ’18, , July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
© 2018 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5657-2/18/07. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210200

2

SCOPE

The LND4IR workshop covers different aspects of learning from
limited or noisy data, with a focus on information retrieval applications. The subareas covered by the workshop include:
(1) Learning from noisy data for IR
(a) Learning from automatically constructed data
(b) Learning from implicit feedback data, e.g., click data

1439

Workshop

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

Distant or weak supervision and learning from IR heuristics
Unsupervised and semi-supervised learning for IR
Transfer learning for IR
Incorporating expert or domain knowledge to improve learningbased IR models
(a) Learning from labeled features
(b) Incorporating IR axioms to improve machine learning
models

3

ORGANIZERS

Hamed Zamani is a PhD candidate (with distinction) in the Center for Intelligent Information Retrieval at the University of Massachusetts Amherst, working with W. Bruce Croft. His research
interests include various aspects of core information retrieval, such
as query representation, document representation, and ranking.
His research mostly focuses on unsupervised or weakly supervised
approaches. Hamed is an ACM SIGIR student liaison, representing
north and south Americas, and an organizer of the ACM RecSys
Challenge 2018. He has also served as PC member at major IR
venues, such as SIGIR, WSDM, WWW, and CIKM.
Mostafa Dehghani is a PhD student at the University of Amsterdam working with Jaap Kamps and Maarten de Rijke. His doctorate
research lies at the intersection machine learning and information retrieval, in particular employing weak supervision signals
for training neural models for IR problems. He has contributed
to top-tier ML and IR conferences like NIPS, ICLR, SIGIR, CIKM,
WSDM, and ICTIR by publishing papers and giving tutorials and
received awards at SIGIR, ICTIR, ECIR, and CLEF for his works.
He has done internships at Google Research and Google Brain on
Neural Networks for Language understanding and Generation.
Fernando Diaz is a Director of Research lead at Spotify. Prior to
joining Spotify, Fernando was a senior researcher and founding
member of Microsoft Research New York. His primary research
area is information retrieval, focusing on query understanding, core
ranking, and evaluation. He received his PhD from the University
of Massachusetts Amherst. Fernando’s work has received awards at
SIGIR, WSDM, ISCRAM, and ECIR. He is the recipient of the 2017
British Computer Society Karen Spärck Jones Award. He regularly
serves as SPC and PC member at major IR venues, and has organized
multiple workshops in the past.
Hang Li is director of Toutiao AI Lab, adjunct professors of Peking
University and Nanjing University. His research areas include information retrieval, natural language processing, statistical machine
learning, and data mining. He earned his PhD from the University
of Tokyo in 1998. He worked at the NEC lab, and Microsoft Research Asia, and Noah’s Ark Lab of Huawei Technologies. Hang
has published three technical books, and over 100 technical papers.
He and his colleagues received the SIGKDD ’08 best application
paper award, the SIGIR ’08 best student paper award, the ACL ’12
best student paper award. Hang has served as PC chair, Senior PC
member, or PC member at top international conferences, including
SIGIR, WWW, WSDM, ACL, EMNLP, NIPS, SIGKDD, ICDM, ACML.
He is an IEEE Fellow and an ACM Distinguished Scientist.
Nick Craswell is a Principal Applied Science Manager in Microsoft
Bing, working on core relevance. He leads a team of applied researchers in the UK, US and Australia. He joined Microsoft in 2004

and joined the Bing team in 2006, while remaining active in research
publication. He received his PhD from the Australian National University and worked at Australia’s CSIRO before joining Microsoft.
His research interests include web search ranking, log mining and
evaluation.

4

PROGRAM COMMITTEE

The program committee of the LND4IR workshop is as follows:
• Michael Bendersky, Google Inc.
• Daniel Cohen, University of Massachusetts Amherst
• W. Bruce Croft, University of Massachusetts Amherst
• J. Shane Culpepper, RMIT University
• Maarten de Rijke, University of Amsterdam
• Jiafeng Guo, Chinese Academy of Sciences
• Claudia Hauff, Delft University of Technology
• Jaap Kamps, University of Amsterdam
• Craig Macdonald, University of Glasgow
• Bhaskar Mitra, Microsoft
• Amirmohammad Rooshenas, University of Massachusetts Amherst
• Min Zhang, Tsinghua University
• Yongfeng Zhang, Rutgers University

REFERENCES
[1] Nick Craswell, W Bruce Croft, Maarten de Rijke, Jiafeng Guo, and Bhaskar Mitra.
2017. SIGIR 2017 Workshop on Neural Information Retrieval (Neu-IR’17). In
Proceedings of the 40th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’17). Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan, 1431–
1432.
[2] Nick Craswell, W. Bruce Croft, Jiafeng Guo, Bhaskar Mitra, and Maarten de
Rijke. 2016. Neu-IR: The SIGIR 2016 Workshop on Neural Information Retrieval.
In Proceedings of the 39th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’16). Pisa, Italy, 1245–1246.
[3] Mostafa Dehghani, Arash Mehrjou, Stephan Gouws, Jaap Kamps, and Bernhard
Schölkopf. 2018. Fidelity-Weighted Learning. In Proceedings of the 2018 International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR ’18).
[4] Mostafa Dehghani, Aliaksei Severyn, Sascha Rothe, and Jaap Kamps. 2017. Avoiding Your Teacher’s Mistakes: Training Neural Networks with Controlled Weak
Supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.00313 (2017).
[5] Mostafa Dehghani, Aliaksei Severyn, Sascha Rothe, and Jaap Kamps. 2017. Learning to Learn from Weak Supervision by Full Supervision. In Proceedings of the
NIPS 2017 Workshop on Meta-Learning (MetaLearn ’17).
[6] Mostafa Dehghani, Hamed Zamani, Aliaksei Severyn, Jaap Kamps, and W. Bruce
Croft. 2017. Neural Ranking Models with Weak Supervision. In Proceedings of
the 40th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’17). Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan, 65–74.
[7] Fernando Diaz. 2016. Learning to Rank with Labeled Features. In Proceedings
of the 2016 ACM International Conference on the Theory of Information Retrieval
(ICTIR ’16). Newark, Delaware, USA, 41–44.
[8] Thorsten Joachims, Adith Swaminathan, and Tobias Schnabel. 2017. Unbiased
Learning-to-Rank with Biased Feedback. In Proceedings of the Tenth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining (WSDM ’17). Cambridge,
United Kingdom, 781–789.
[9] Xuanhui Wang, Nadav Golbandi, Michael Bendersky, Donald Metzler, and Marc
Najork. 2018. Position Bias Estimation for Unbiased Learning to Rank in Personal
Search. In Proceedings of the Eleventh ACM International Conference on Web Search
and Data Mining (WSDM ’18). Marina Del Rey, CA, USA, 610–618.
[10] Hamed Zamani and W. Bruce Croft. 2017. Relevance-based Word Embedding.
In Proceedings of the 40th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’17). Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan, 505–
514.
[11] Hamed Zamani, W. Bruce Croft, and J. Shane Culpepper. 2018. Neural Query Performance Prediction using Weak Supervision from Multiple Signals. In Proceedings of the 41st International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development
in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’18). Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.

1440

