SIRIP: Industry Days

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Clova: Services and Devices Powered by AI
Inho Kang

Naver Search
Seongnam, Korea
once.ihkang@navercorp.com
a diversified platform, offering a variety of services and contents
for more than 200 million users around the globe. Clova is an
intelligent personal assistant developed by both Naver and Line.
Clova-powered mobile apps and AI speakers have been launched
in Korea and Japan and the companies continues to explore areas
such as natural language processing, computer vision, speech, and
recommendation engines.

ABSTRACT
NAVER, Korea’s No. 1 internet company, and LINE, the Japan-based
global messenger platform, have teamed up to use their extensive
online content databases (documents, maps, encyclopedia, etc.) and
user information to develop an AI platform called Clova (Cloudbased Virtual Assistant). Clova’s deep-learning based methods have
made tremendous progress in image classification and intelligent
Q&A response. For example, in Naver, users can procure product or location information by showing pictures. Keyword-based
matching is enhanced using semantic analysis, and retrieving top
links is changed to answering questions by refining user queries
through dialogue. In addition to PC and mobile, Clova is evolving
to enable a user to access the relevant information using multiple
devices and interfaces. Line released a smart speaker called Clova
Friends that includes Line’s free voice-call function and infrared
home-appliance control. IPTV set-top box powered-by the Clova
AI platform which can recommend movies based on Naver’s user
reviews. In this talk, I will cover some efforts and challenges in
understanding and satisfying users on each device with sophisticated natural language processing technologies. I will introduce
the technically challenging problems that we are currently tackling
and future AI developments.

BIO
Inho Kang is a senior manager of the Clova natural language processing group, where he oversees multiple research teams including
Q&A, dialogue management, and advanced search technology. He
obtained his Ph.D. in computer science from KAIST, Korea, and
joined Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology in 2004. Then he
did post-doctoral work at Language Technologies Institute of CMU
(Carnegie Mellon University) from 2006 to 2007. There he worked
in the GALE (Global Autonomous Language Exploitation) project.
In 2008, he joined Naver, Korea. He and his team of researchers
have developed many key technologies that have been applied to
Naver Search, for example, query-centric ranking algorithms based
on click-modeling techniques, Libra algorithm to emphasize highquality and original documents in a search result, and currently
Clova’s dialogue management models for context-awareness.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems → Question answering;

KEYWORDS
AI Platform; Question Answering; Smart Speaker; Home AI;
ACM Reference Format:
Inho Kang. 2018. Clova: Services and Devices Powered by AI. In SIGIR ’18:
The 41st International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development
in Information Retrieval, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 1 page. https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210208

NAVER, LINE, AND CLOVA
As Korea’s No. 1 internet company, Naver Corporation accounts for
over 70 percent of Korea’s search market, and operates a diverse
range of services and products related to news, blogging, music,
translations, webtoons, video etc. Line Corporation is a subsidiary
of Naver Corporation. Based in Japan, Line Corporation launched
the Line messaging app in June 2011 and since then has grown into
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’18, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
© 2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5657-2/18/07.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210208

1359

