SIRIP: Industry Days

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Large Scale Search Engine Marketing (SEM) at Airbnb
James Wong

Airbnb Inc
james.wong@airbnb.com

Brendan Collins

Airbnb Inc
brendan.collins@airbnb.com

Ganesh Venkataraman

Airbnb Inc
ganesh.venkataraman@airbnb.com

in a search engine’s auction, as well for converting a user’s click
into a booking.

ABSTRACT
Airbnb is an online marketplace which connects hosts and guests
all over the world. Our inventory includes over 4.5 million listings,
which enable the travel of over 300 million guests. The growth
team at Airbnb is responsible for helping travelers find Airbnb,
in part by participating in ad auctions on major search platforms
such as Google and Bing. In this talk, we will describe how advertising efficiently on these platforms requires solving several
information retrieval and machine learning problems, including
query understanding, click value estimation, and realtime pacing
of our expenditure.

BIDDING IN ADVERTISING AUCTIONS
The selection of advertisements on a search platforms is accomplished through a realtime auction, in which each advertiser submits bids ([6]). At Airbnb, we aim to set bids for each ad in order to
maximize the return on our advertising budget, while pacing our
expenditure to ensure our budget is not exceeded.
To do so, we first estimate the distribution of bidding opportunities with respect to time in order to optimally spread out our
budget through time. This distribution is primarily obtained from
our historical logs of traffic volume, both from paid sources as well
as from other sources. From this distribution, we can compute a
desired glide path of expenditure over time.
Next, we estimate the value of a click to Airbnb based on a several factors such as the keyword a user issues, the user location,
the user device, the time of the query issuance, and seasonal trends
in our business. The click value estimation can be thought of as a
decomposition of (1) booking probability given a click within an
attribution window over many days, and (2) the marginal value of
the booking to Airbnb. Our system combines these two subcomponents to generate a single prediction of the expected value of an ad
click over the attribution window.
We combine these two predictions in a real-time bidding system which continually refines our bids to maximize the return on
our budget. Specifically, our bids are obtained by multiplying our
estimate of the value of a click by a pacing parameter; the latter
parameter is set using feedback control, based on the difference
between our planned expenditure trajectory, and the realized expenditure we observe.

KEYWORDS
Information Retrieval, Advertising Systems, Pacing, Forecasting
ACM Reference Format:
James Wong, Brendan Collins, and Ganesh Venkataraman. 2018. Large Scale
Search Engine Marketing (SEM) at Airbnb. In SIGIR ’18: The 41st International
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research & Development in Information Retrieval,
July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210207

FROM QUERIES TO ADS
Our setting is very different from most IR problems, in that the
systems we build do not execute in response to a particular query.
Rather, we compute a set of keywords, ads, landing pages and bids
to upload to an advertising platform, such as Google or Bing. The
advertising platform runs a realtime auction based on the data
we upload in response to a user query. As such, it is important
that before any particular auction begins, we are able to develop a
comprehensive set of queries for which we would like to advertise,
as well as provide appropriate ad copy, landing pages, and bids.
To do this, we begin with query understanding. We obtain a list
of queries either from our own search logs, by marketing specialists,
or by algorithmically generating likely phrases. Next, we perform
entity extraction on this list to identify a location of interest, and
any other indication of user intent (such as a price preference, or
preference for a particular type of accommodation as indicated in
Figure 2). This query parsing is used to assign a potential ad into
our account, to assign a relevant landing page, and set a relevant
ad copy that will appear in the ad. The relevance of an ad and
landing page to a user’s intent is critical both for performing well

SYSTEMS AND EXPERIMENTATION
The bidding system consists of five main components: data collection, model training, value estimation, pacing, and bid deployment.
We use Airflow ([3]), an open source ETL system built in-house,
extensively for our bidding system. Daily scheduled jobs collect
training and feature data at the click level through various internal
Airbnb data sources (e.g. demand and supply forecasting, organic
signals) and external data sources (e.g. AdWords performance reports, third party data). The data is processed and aggregated to
the relevant scope for value estimation. Models are automatically
trained, evaluated, and scored once the training data is ready. To
make accurate predictions for the attribution window without sacrificing model staleness, we make predictions on a shorter attribution
window and empirically adjust the estimated return. Once the final
paced bids have been generated, we leverage the AdWords API to
programmatically set bids across our portfolio. We also optimize
our ad copy by continuously experimenting with various forms

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’18, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
© 2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5657-2/18/07.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210207

1357

SIRIP: Industry Days

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

SIGIR ’18, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

James Wong, Brendan Collins, and Ganesh Venkataraman

of ad copy, and dynamically allocating traffic to high-performing
variants.
Additionally, we face several challenges in conducting experiments. These include seasonality, daily fluctuations, and measurement on a long conversion window. To conduct experiments, we
use a difference in difference (DID) experiment setup. The campaigns are first stratified by historical spend and efficiency and
then randomly allocated into control and treatment groups. Once
the allocation is complete, the control and treatment undergo a
warm-up period. After the warm-up period, we enter the experiment period when the treatment is applied to the treatment group.
At the end of the experiment, analysis is performed comparing
the lift between the control and treatment groups relative to their
respective warm-up periods. The DID setup not only adjusts for preexperiment bias but also reduces variance and increases statistical
power when interpreting the results.

Figure 1: SEM Ad in Google

Figure 2: Entity extraction from user query

AUTHOR BIOS
James Wong
James Wong is an engineer on the Paid Growth team at Airbnb,
where he has worked across the SEM stack with a focus on keyword
intelligence and algorithmic bidding. His work has been impactful
in driving top-line ad efficiency and growth metrics. Prior to Airbnb,
James was a Senior Engineer at Facebook, where he developed
machine learning systems powering page recommendations, feed
ranking, search, and ads targeting. He has co-authored 7 patents
within the field of machine learning. He holds a Master’s degree
from Stanford and bachelor’s degrees in computer science and
bioengineering at the University of Washington.

job search, machine learned ranking for people search typeahead
(system that allows members to search for 500MM+ users via instant results), introducing machine learned ranking towards skills
search at LinkedIn (ex: searching for people skilled at "information
retrieval"). He co-authored a paper on personalized ranking which
won the best paper award at the IEEE Big Data Conference 2015 [5].
He has co-authored 16+ AI related patents. Prior to LinkedIn he was
the founding engineer of a payments startup where he developed
algorithms to detect/prevent eCommerce fraud. He holds a Ph.D.
from Texas A&M in Electrical & Computer Engineering where he
was the recipient of the Dean’s graduate merit scholarship. His work
has been presented in variety of prestigious conferences including
SIGKDD, SIGIR([7], [1], [2]), and CIKM([4]).

Brendan Collins
Brendan Collins is an engineer on the Paid Growth team at Airbnb,
where he is working on keyword intelligence and algorithmic bidding. At Airbnb, he previously led the Search Relevance team, which
has developed a personalized machine learned ranking system that
successfully models and integrates the preferences of many actors
in the Airbnb marketplace. Over the previous two years the team
has moved, over several iterations, from a heuristic rule-based system to a system built on deep neural nets, leveraging several years
of training data. Multiple launches along this journey have contributed percentage-point improvements in Airbnb’s core business
metrics. Prior to Airbnb, Brendan was a Staff Engineer at Google,
where he was the technical lead for several teams. Brendan studied
Computer Science at Princeton University.

REFERENCES
[1] Dhruv Arya and Ganesh Venkataraman. 2017. Search Without a Query: Powering
Job Recommendations via Search Index at LinkedIn. In Proceedings of the 40th
International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval. 1347–1347.
[2] Dhruv Arya, Ganesh Venkataraman, Aman Grover, and Krishnaram Kenthapadi.
2017. Candidate Selection for Large Scale Personalized Search and Recommender
Systems. In Proceedings of the 40th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research
and Development in Information Retrieval. 1391–1393.
[3] Maxime Beauchemin. 2015.
Airflow: a workflow management platform.
(2015). Retrieved May 2, 2018 from https://medium.com/airbnb-engineering/
airflow-a-workflow-management-platform-46318b977fd8
[4] Aman Grover, Dhruv Arya, and Ganesh Venkataraman. 2017. Latency Reduction
via Decision Tree Based Query Construction. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on
Conference on Information and Knowledge Management. 1399–1407.
[5] Viet Ha-Thuc, Ganesh Venkataraman, Mario Rodriguez, Shakti Sinha, Senthil
Sundaram, and Lin Guo. 2015. Personalized expertise search at LinkedIn. In 2015
IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data). 1238–1247.
[6] Hal R. Varian. 2009. Online Ad Auctions. American Economic Review 99, 2 (May
2009), 430–34. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.99.2.430
[7] Ganesh Venkataraman, Abhimanyu Lad, Viet Ha-Thuc, and Dhruv Arya. 2016.
Instant Search: A Hands-on Tutorial. In Proceedings of the 39th International ACM
SIGIR conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. 1211–1214.

Ganesh Venkataraman
Ganesh Venkataraman leads guest growth engineering at Airbnb.
His group works on variety of growth initiatives which use AI
including - SEM, Display ads targeting, multi touch attribution
etc. He used to lead all AI powering jobs relevance at LinkedIn.
This includes personalized job search, recommendations and statistical inference and insights from salary. His contributions at
LinkedIn include - leading a multi group effort that led to 50% improvement in job applications, leading end to end re-architecture of

1358

