Demonstration Papers II

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

RecAdvisor: Criteria-based Ph.D. Supervisor Recommendation
Mir Anamul Hasan and Daniel G. Schwartz
Florida State University
Tallahassee, FL, USA
hasan@cs.fsu.edu,schwartz@cs.fsu.edu

ABSTRACT
Re-ranker

This demo presents RecAdvisor, a prototype recommender system
for finding and recommending potential Ph.D. supervisors for students by identifying different criteria to consider when selecting a
supervisor.1

Microsoft Academic

CCS CONCEPTS

Conference & Journal
Ranking

• Information systems → Information retrieval; Retrieval
tasks and goals; Recommender systems; Expert search;

Profile
Analyzer &
Indexer

Supervisor
Supervisor
Profiles
Supervisor
Profiles
Profiles

KEYWORDS
Academic Search; Supervisor Selection; Expert Recommendation;
Ph.D. Supervisor; Fuzzy AHP; MCDM

Recommendation
Engine

User’s
Search
Profile

Recommended
Supervisor
Profiles

Faculty Expertise and
Advancement System

ACM Reference Format:
Mir Anamul Hasan and Daniel G. Schwartz. 2018. RecAdvisor: Criteriabased Ph.D. Supervisor Recommendation . In SIGIR ’18: The 41st International
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research & Development in Information Retrieval,
July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 4 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210178

1

Search & Analytics
Engine

- ES Relevance Score
- Publication Score
- Research Grant Score
- Collaboration Score

Dataset Maker
User
DigiNole

Figure 1: RecAdvisor: System Architecture.

INTRODUCTION

Finding the right supervisor is crucial for Ph.D. students as it plays
an important role in shaping their future career. It can be challenging to make the right decision at such an early stage of their
graduate study. Unorganized overload of information can make it
even more challenging. A recommender system that can recommend a list of potential supervisors based on the student’s interest
in a concise and informative way, can be useful.
There are many works on research paper recommender systems,
as well as expert recommender systems in enterprises [1]. However, there are not many works on recommending Ph.D. advisor to
students in academia. Several existing works have formulated the
Ph.D. supervisor selection problem as a Multiple Criteria Decision
Making (MCDM) problem and solved it using different existing
methods such as Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP), Analytical
Network Process (ANP), and COmplex PRoportional ASsessment of
alternatives to Grey relations (COPRAS-G) [2, 4, 5]. In these works,
the criteria considered are subjective in nature as they reflect the
judgments and opinions of both the students and professors. Other

existing works, which considered criteria that are objective in nature, have missed either important relevant criteria or important
details of a criterion [7, 8].
We present RecAdvisor, a tool to facilitate students in finding their PhD supervisors, whereby a user will be able to select
criteria/sub-criteria of interest by completing a user profile, based
on which a list of potential Ph.D. supervisors will be generated.

2

SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE

to be completed in 2018.

RecAdvisor is a multi-phase content-based recommender system.
Figure 1 depicts the architecture of RecAdvisor. The Dataset Maker
component creates supervisor profiles by collecting information
from four different sources. Then the profiles are analyzed and
indexed in Elasticsearch (ES), a search engine based on Lucene
[3]. The recommendation engine retrieves matching profiles based
on the user’s profile and re-ranks the candidate results using the
Re-ranker component based on three other optional metrics (which
quantify a professor’s publication record, research grant record,
and collaboration record), which the user can select in the user
profile.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’18, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
© 2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5657-2/18/07.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210178

We collected data for 54 professors from 3 different departments
in the computing disciplines (Computer Science, Scientific Computing, and Electrical and Computer Engineering) at Florida State
University (FSU). Supervisor profiles are constructed by collecting information from the following four sources: (i) we extracted

1 This paper summarizes a part of author one’s doctoral dissertation, which is expected

2.1

1325

Dataset Maker

Demonstration Papers II

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

SIGIR ’18, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Mir Anamul Hasan and Daniel G. Schwartz
user profile. It then integrates the ES relevance score with three
other optional metrics using the Re-ranker component: (i) publication score: computed by integrating four other optional metrics,
namely, overall publication quality (in terms of citation count and
the quality of journal/conference in which they are published), consistency in publishing, recent publications, and publications of the
professor’s graduated students, (ii) research grant score: computed
by integrating three other optional metrics: research grant quality
(grant duration, grant amount and the role played by the professor
(eg., PI, Co-PI, etc.)), consistency in getting grants, and recent grant
record, and (iii) collaboration score: computed by integrating three
other optional metrics, namely, influential co-authors (in terms of
citation), recent collaboration record in research papers, and record
as co-PI/co-I in research grants.

3

Figure 2: RecAdvisor: User Profile.
publication data of professors using the Microsoft Academic Knowledge API from the Microsoft Academic Graph (MAG) [6], (ii) rank
of conferences and journals where the professors have published
are extracted from Computing Research and Education Association (CORE) Conference and Journal database2 , (iii) research grant
information and previous and current student information of a
faculty member are extracted from their CVs, which are available
at a public CV database maintained by the Faculty Expertise and
Advancement System (FEAS)3 , and (iv) graduated Ph.D. student’s
dissertation information (title, abstract) are extracted from DigiNole4 , FSU’s digital repository, where dissertations completed from
Fall 2002 to the present are available.

2.2

REFERENCES
[1] Joeran Beel, Bela Gipp, Stefan Langer, and Corinna Breitinger. 2016. paper recommender systems: a literature survey. International Journal on Digital Libraries 17,
4 (2016), 305–338.
[2] S Datta, GS Beriha, B Patnaik, and SS Mahapatra. 2009. Use of compromise
ranking method for supervisor selection: A multi-criteria decision making (MCDM)
approach. International Journal of Vocational and Technical Education 1, 1 (2009).
[3] Clinton Gormley and Zachary Tong. 2015. Elasticsearch: The Definitive Guide: A
Distributed Real-Time Search and Analytics Engine. " O’Reilly Media, Inc.".
[4] Mansour Momeni, Behnaz Samimi, Mohammad Ali Afshari, Mohammad Hasan
Maleki, and Javad Mohammadi. 2011. Selection process of supervisor for doctoral
dissertation using analytical network process (ANP): An Iranian study. Journal of
Management and Strategy 2, 2 (2011), 63.
[5] Subhajyoti Ray and G Marakas. 2007. Selecting a doctoral dissertation supervisor:
Analytical hierarchy approach to the multiple criteria problem. International
Journal of Doctoral Studies 2, 1 (2007), 23–32.
[6] Arnab Sinha, Zhihong Shen, Yang Song, Hao Ma, Darrin Eide, Bo-june Paul Hsu,
and Kuansan Wang. 2015. An overview of microsoft academic service (mas) and
applications. In Proceedings of the 24th international conf. on WWW. ACM.
[7] Li-fang Zhang. 2006. Does student–teacher thinking style match/mismatch matter
in students achievement? Educational Psychology 26, 3 (2006), 395–409.
[8] Mingyu Zhang, Jian Ma, Zhiying Liu, Jianshan Sun, and Thushari Silva. 2016. A
research analytics framework-supported recommendation approach for supervisor
selection. British Journal of Educational Technology 47, 2 (2016), 403–420.

Profile Analyzer and Indexer

All the collected profiles are first analyzed and then indexed in ES.
We used the ES Snowball Analyzer [3], which analyzes the text
fields (e.g., research interests, publication title, abstract, etc.) in the
supervisor profiles by generating tokens, removing English stop
words, transforming everything to lowercase, and stemming the
remaining words.

2.3

RECADVISOR IN ACTION

First, users will need to complete a user profile based on which
RecAdvisor will return a list of recommended potential supervisors.
Figure 2 shows the RecAvisor User Profile interface, where the users
can enter their area of research interest, specific research topic of
interest, title and abstract of any research paper of interest. In the
user profile interface, the identified criteria/sub-criteria to consider
when selecting a Ph.D. supervisor are presented in a tabular form.
The user can select the criteria/sub-criteria of interest based on
which the final recommendation score will be computed.
Figure 3 shows the RecAdvisor result interface, where useful
information on each professor’s research area, publication record,
research grant record, and students record are presented concisely.
Users can navigate through the result page, and by clicking any
of the results, they can see the full profile of the supervisor. In
the supervisor profile interface, information is presented under
different categories with important statistics in graphic forms (e.g.,
table, column chart, pie chart, etc.), which are depicted in Figure
4-8. The application is developed using J2EE technologies. We used
Google Chart5 to generate the charts.

Recommendation Engine

First, the recommendation engine retrieves relevant candidate supervisor profiles by querying the indexed data in ES based on the
2 http://www.core.edu.au/
3 http://feas.fsu.edu/

4 http://diginole.lib.fsu.edu/

5 https://developers.google.com/chart/

1326

Demonstration Papers II

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

RecAdvisor: Criteria-based Ph.D. Supervisor Recommendation

SIGIR ’18, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Figure 3: RecAdvisor: Result Interface.

Figure 4: Supervisor Profile: Research Area and Publications. Professors’ research area and important information about publications (e.g., citation, journal/conference details, year wise publication count, etc.) are presented in this section.

Figure 5: Supervisor Profile: Conferences. Important information about conferences where the professor published his/her
works (e.g., rank of the conference, no. of times published in that conference, etc.) are presented in this section.

1327

Demonstration Papers II

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

SIGIR ’18, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Mir Anamul Hasan and Daniel G. Schwartz

Figure 6: Supervisor Profile: Co-author information. Important information about co-author (e.g., their affiliation, total no. of
collaboration, collaboration in recent years (in last 5 years), total citation count, etc.) are presented in this section.

Figure 7: Supervisor Profile: Students. Important information about professors’ graduated and current students (e.g., dissertation details, no. of publications with the professor, no. of times the student was first author, etc.) are presented in this section.

Figure 8: Supervisor Profile: Research Grants. Details on awarded grants are presented in this section.

1328

