Demonstration Papers II

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Interactive Symptom Elicitation for Diagnostic
Information Retrieval
Tuukka Ruotsalo and Antti Lipsanen

Department of Computer Science, University of Helsinki, Finland
first.last@helsinki.fi
Recently researchers have developed techniques and gained understanding on how to help laypeople identify credible information
[7], but traditional information retrieval techniques applied to medical information rely heavily on ranking functions that are based
on learning symptom-disease connections via occurrence statistics
[5], and the key focus has been in understanding the semantic variance in user input or query expansion from conventional digital
library or Web document sources [3, 11]. Another line of research
has focused on diagnostic decision support systems or symptom
checkers [4, 8]. However, diagnostic decision support often relies on
the assumption that full information about the patient is available
and the system is primarily intended to be used by professionals to
support clinical decision processes.
Less attention has been devoted to understand the kind of data,
inference mechanisms, and interactions with layman users who
seek medical advice. For example, consider a layman user suffering
from headache and turning into a search engine to find out about
possible causes of "headache". The user may receive a variety of
information about medical conditions associated with the symptom
"headache", some being associated with rare conditions that often
also require other symptoms to be present. Moreover, the user may
click pages that associate headache with these rare conditions, say
brain tumors, and this click data is then used by the search engine to
reinforce these pages to rank higher in subsequent searches of other
users. As a result, search engines have the potential to increase the
anxieties of people who have little or no medical training, instead
of providing accurate, reputable, and useful information.
We propose interactive symptom elicitation for diagnostic information retrieval. This approach requires only minimal initial
input from the user (e.g. typing in "headache") and interactively
elicitates information about related symptoms from the user based
on a model learned from electronic health records (e.g. asking about
whether the user is suffering from "neck stiffness", "vomiting", "vision defect", "sore throat", or "fever") in order to make a principled
inference about the possible diagnosis. The approach can help the
user to seek a more objective view of the experienced symptoms
and increase the confidence of the information presented for the
user. Our approach is in contrast to the previous work as we use reliable data describing symptoms and the related medical conditions
estimated from clinical cases. We also tackle the problem of eliciting
the correct symptom information from the user by interactively
eliciting interaction dialogue between the search system and the
user.
We demonstrate a functional system implementing interactive
symptom elicitation and report results from a user experiment
where layman used the system to detect diagnosis. The results
demonstrate the effectiveness and reliability of the estimation of
user’s medical conditions compared to a conventional typed query
driven interaction.

ABSTRACT
Medical information retrieval suffers from a dual problem: users
struggle in describing what they are experiencing from a medical
perspective and the search engine is struggling in retrieving the
information exactly matching what users are experiencing. We
demonstrate interactive symptom elicitation for diagnostic information retrieval. Interactive symptom elicitation builds a model
from the user’s initial description of the symptoms and interactively
elicitates new information about symptoms by posing questions of
related, but uncertain, symptoms for the user. As a result, the system
interactively learns the estimates of symptoms while controlling the
uncertainties related to the diagnostic process. The learned model
is then used to rank the associated diagnoses that the user might
be experiencing. Our preliminary experimental results show that
interactive symptom elicitation can significantly improve user’s
capability to describe their symptoms, increase the confidence of
the model, and enable effective diagnostic information retrieval.

KEYWORDS
Symptom elicitation; Medical information retrieval
ACM Reference Format:
Tuukka Ruotsalo and Antti Lipsanen. 2018. Interactive Symptom Elicitation
for Diagnostic Information Retrieval. In SIGIR ’18: The 41st International
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval,
July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, Article 4,
4 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210172

1

INTRODUCTION

Amongst the general public, electronic sources are among the most
important sources of health and medical information [2]. The ability
to find relevant, informative results can be critical in determining
whether people seek treatment, or whether a potential diagnosis
is found [9]. Despite the increasing availability of medical information on-line, utilizing it for medical advice comes with a risk of
experiencing "cyberchondria"; search engines having the potential
to escalate medical concerns [10]. To put it simply, searchers are
biased to continue searching for more serious diagnosis and search
engines are biased to promote popular content so that users are
driven to results that other users have preferred instead of content
that would be appropriate from a medical perspective.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’18, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
© 2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5657-2/18/07.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210172

1301

Demonstration Papers II

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

SIGIR ’18, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

T. Ruotsalo et al.

Figure 1: Left: A screenshot of the user interface. The user can input symptoms by typing them into an autocomplete query
field (A). The elicited information is shown for the user (B). The system elicitates interaction with the user by asking about
symptoms. The user can confirm, reject, or skip a question (C). Right: Results after five iterations. The system ranks common
cold and influenza as the two most likely diagnoses. In this case, the influenza (marked with green background) was the correct
diagnosis confirmed by the patient.

2

the system first asks about "cough" which is related to more common respiratory infections and therefore having high uncertainty.
The user confirms "cough" and the system subsequentially asks
about "nasal congestion", which now has both high expectation,
but also high uncertainty. As shown in Figure 2, these questions
are asked not because of the highest expectation, but because of
the highest upper confidence bound. In other words, "cough" is not
the most likely symptom given the user’s interaction history, but
it has the best potential to provide useful information. After these
interactions, the system ranks highest the correct "common cold"
diagnosis despite the user did not initially enter the most typical
symptoms related to common cold.

INTERACTIVE SYMPTOM ELICITATION

Interactive symptom elicitation is based on Bayesian optimization
by rigorously controlling the uncertainty of the user input. The user
can reward or penalize the proposed symptoms and new estimates
are learned on-line in response to user interactions [6]. The following subsections describe the user interface, interaction design, and
the prediction and ranking models.

2.1

User Interface and Interaction Design

Figure 1 shows the user interface of the system. The user starts the
retrieval process by typing symptoms into an autocomplete query
field. The system elicitates interaction with the user by asking about
related symptoms1 .
At each iteration, a new question about a potential symptom is
asked based on the feedback obtained in previous iterations. The
user can confirm, reject, or skip a question. In response, the system
exploits the feedback elicited from the user (strengthen the most
likely diagnosis), but at the same time balances it with exploration
(acquire information about related, but yet uncertain symptoms).
This learning procedure is called the exploration/exploitation tradeoff of reinforcement learning [1].
Figure 2 shows an example of an interaction sequence and corresponding results. The user has common cold and the user has
inserted a symptom "headache", but does not yet have "fever", "nausea", "vision problems", or "seizures". The highest expectation with
this input would be to ask the user about "difficulty of swallowing"
which is related to some specific diagnoses, such as "Mononucleosis", "Reflux", or "Stroke". However, due to the exploration effect,

2.2

Prediction and Ranking Models

We approach the problem via interactive Bayesian optimization
via multi-armed bandits, a type of reinforcement learning, and
utilize the upper confidence bound algorithm [1]. In the model,
each symptom is an arm of the multi-armed bandit model, and
each arm is modeled using a context vector containing all diagnoses associated with the symptom. The algorithm controls the
exploration/exploitation tradeoff of the estimates: it predicts expected symptom relevances (exploiting symptoms that have the
best fit given the user feedback) and corresponding upper confidence bounds. The symptom with the highest upper confidence
bound is selected for interaction. The symptoms with high upper
confidence bounds are the ones that have a good fit with less uncertainty (e.g. sore throat for common cold), or lower fit but with
greater uncertainty (e.g. neck stiffness for meningitis). These are
the symptoms that are optimal for user feedback in order to improve the estimates in the subsequent iterations and avoid only
strengthening the most likely estimates.

1A

video illustration of the system functionality is available at:
https://youtu.be/M5etGqiVSFU

1302

Demonstration Papers II

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Interactive Symptom Elicitation for Diagnostic
Information Retrieval

SIGIR ’18, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Figure 2: An illustration of an interaction sequence. The left upper panels show the questions for symptom elicitation. The
left lower panels show the estimates with the expected value (blue) and upper confidence bound (orange). The upper right
panel shows the results before the elicited symptoms and the lower right panel shows the results after the elicited symptoms.
If the system would simply estimate the next symptom to ask
by selecting the highest exploitative estimates, the system could
suggest symptoms similar to the ones fitting to the present estimate
of the diagnosis. This would risk getting stuck in a suboptimal estimate. For example, for the initial symptoms "fever" and "headache",
the system would only ask about symptoms fitting to the most
common "common cold" diagnosis and not symptoms with a less
good present estimate, but the ones that could differentiate the
diagnosis. For example, exploring symptoms, such as "neck stiffness" and "dizziness" the system could learn that the user may be
suffering from "meningitis" instead of common cold. The selected
symptoms are then used to rank the diagnosis using maximum
likelihood estimation with Laplace smoothing [12], which is also
used to compute the confidence of the estimate.

3

as a query that were associated with the diagnosis they entered. After this, the symptom elicitation started. The participants answered
a sequence of 20 questions posed by the system. The experiment
lasted about 10 minutes. Participation was voluntary and the participants could quit the experiment at any point.
Measures We used four measures to quantify the performance
of the system. The mean reciprocal rank, mean rank, and median
rank of the target diagnosis were used to quantify the ranking quality. These measures can be used to evaluate systems that return
a ranked list of answers when only one of the answers is correct.
For example, in our case the system returns a rank of all diagnoses,
but only the target diagnosis is the correct diagnosis. In addition,
we quantified the confidence of the correct diagnosis. This was
measured as the share of the probability mass of the symptoms
that the user selected and that were associated with the correct
diagnosis.
Data A high-quality databased from Symcat2 database was used.
The data originates from real patient cases describing the symptoms and the associated diagnoses. It consists of 800 diagnoses and
377 associated symptoms. Each symptom is associated with the
conditional probability given a diagnosis. Intuitively, it determines
the share of patients having a particular symptom when diagnosed
with a particular diagnosis.

USER EXPERIMENT

A preliminary user experiment was conducted to study the effectiveness of the system in ranking the correct diagnosis in response
to user interactions.

3.1

User Experiment

Experimental design A between subjects design was used: each
participant used the system only once and with only one diagnosis.
Participants Twelve participants were recruited by word of mouth.
The mean age of the participants was 28.33 years. Eight were female,
four were male.
Procedure Participants accessed the system over the Internet. Prior
to the actual experiment, they read instructions and were asked
to insert a medical diagnosis confirmed by a doctor that they had
suffered during the previous six months, along with background
information, such as age and gender. The entered diagnosis was the
target diagnosis used to measure the effectiveness of the ranking.
The participants were then requested to inserted initial symptoms

3.2

Results

The overall results of the user experiment are shown in Table 1.
Interactive symptom elicitation shows decreased performance in
the first five iterations. The median rank of the correct diagnosis
at iteration five is 11.5 compared to the typed query performance
of 4.5 at the first iteration. Similar behavior is observed by using
Mean Reciprocal Rank and mean rank of the correct diagnosis. The
2 http://www.symcat.com/

1303

Demonstration Papers II

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

SIGIR ’18, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

T. Ruotsalo et al.
Questions asked Iter MRR Mean Median Confidence
Typed query
1 0.362
28.6
4.5
0.13
ISE
5 0.358
41.4
11.5
0.38
ISE
10 0.363
23.2
6.5
0.48
ISE
15
0.39
10.5
4
0.6
ISE
20 0.519
10.1
2.5
0.65
Table 1: Results from the user experiment comparing typed
query input and interactive symptom elicitation (ISE). The
measures reported are Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR), mean
rank, median rank, and confidence of the correct diagnosis.
The results are reported over iterations.

experiment suggest that 1) the ranking of the correct diagnosis was
improved due to interactive symptom elicitation when compared
to only typed query input, and 2) the confidence of the correct diagnoses was increased due to interactive symptom elicitation. Our
findings have implications for the design of personalized medical information retrieval systems that can help to avoid "cyberchondria"
and offer tailored support for individual searchers on reputable
medical information sources.

Figure 3: The median rank for all participants and diagnoses
over iterations. The dashed blue line shows the mean median rank and the dashed red line the mean rank of the correct diagnosis over all participants.

improvement in ranking, however, was not found to be significant
with this sample size (Wilcoxon test, p=0.35). The confidence of the
model increases as a function of iterations; the system elicitates
information about symptoms that can strengthen the reliability
of the estimate of the diagnosis. The explanation for the reduced
performance in the first iterations is that the system explores the
symptom space. The results show remarkable improvement in the
confidence of the estimates from 0.13 of the baseline to 0.65 of
the interactive symptom elicitation at 20 iterations (Wilcoxon test,
p=0.0005). This shows that by elicitating information about the
symptoms the system is able to explore alternative diagnosis, differentiate false diagnosis from the correct or potentially correct
diagnosis, and increase the reliability of the diagnosis.
Figure 3 shows the median rank of the correct diagnosis for all
participants, and the mean median rank. The same effect of the
system exploring alternative, yet possible diagnosis, can be seen
between iterations one and six. After six iterations the system starts
to converge towards the correct diagnosis. Even difficult and more
rare diagnoses, such as Tonsillar hypertrophy, Hermorrhoids, and
Polymyalgia Rheumatica are ranked with reasonable performance
(i.e. in top 20), even though such conditions may require examination by physician and more advanced diagnostic procedures. While
the study is preliminary and the sample size of the study is not
yet sufficient for conclusive evidence, it shows that the system is
functional and can be effective in real-life usage.

4

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The research was supported by the Academy of Finland (312274).

REFERENCES
[1] Peter Auer. 2003. Using Confidence Bounds for Exploitation-exploration Tradeoffs. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 3 (March 2003), 397–422. http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?
id=944919.944941
[2] Gunther Eysenbach and Christian Köhler. 2002. How do consumers search for
and appraise health information on the world wide web? Qualitative study using
focus groups, usability tests, and in-depth interviews. BMJ 324, 7337 (2002),
573–577. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.324.7337.573
[3] Gang Luo, Chunqiang Tang, Hao Yang, and Xing Wei. 2008. MedSearch: A
Specialized Search Engine for Medical Information Retrieval. In Proceedings of
the 17th ACM Conference on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM ’08).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 143–152. https://doi.org/10.1145/1458082.1458104
[4] Randolph A. Miller. 2016. Diagnostic Decision Support Systems. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 181–208.
[5] Maya Rotmensch, Yoni Halpern, Abdulhakim Tlimat, Steven Horng, and David
Sontag. 2017. Learning a Health Knowledge Graph from Electronic Medical
Records. Scientific Reports 7, 1 (2017), 2045–2322.
[6] Tuukka Ruotsalo, Giulio Jacucci, Petri Myllymäki, and Samuel Kaski. 2014. Interactive Intent Modeling: Information Discovery Beyond Search. Commun. ACM
58, 1 (Dec. 2014), 86–92. https://doi.org/10.1145/2656334
[7] Julia Schwarz and Meredith Morris. 2011. Augmenting Web Pages and Search
Results to Support Credibility Assessment. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’11). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
1245–1254. https://doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979127
[8] Hannah L Semigran, Jeffrey A Linder, Courtney Gidengil, and Ateev
Mehrotra. 2015. Evaluation of symptom checkers for self diagnosis and
triage: audit study. BMJ 351 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.h3480
arXiv:http://www.bmj.com/content/351/bmj.h3480.full.pdf
[9] Vladan Starcevic and David Berle. 2013. Cyberchondria: towards a better understanding of excessive health-related Internet use. Expert Review of Neurotherapeutics 13, 2 (2013), 205–213.
[10] Ryen W. White and Eric Horvitz. 2009. Cyberchondria: Studies of the Escalation
of Medical Concerns in Web Search. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. 27, 4, Article 23 (Nov.
2009), 37 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/1629096.1629101
[11] Qing T. Zeng, Jonathan Crowell, Robert M. Plovnick, Eunjung Kim, Long Ngo,
and Emily Dibble. 2006. Assisting Consumer Health Information Retrieval with
Query Recommendations. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association
13, 1 (2006), 80–90.
[12] Chengxiang Zhai and John Lafferty. 2004. A Study of Smoothing Methods for
Language Models Applied to Information Retrieval. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. 22, 2
(April 2004), 179–214. https://doi.org/10.1145/984321.984322

CONCLUSIONS

We introduced interactive symptom elicitation and demonstrated
the technique as a part of a real-world diagnostic information retrieval system. The approach can help to seek more objective view
of the experienced symptoms, ask the correct questions to reinforce or discard information about medical conditions, and rank
information about medical conditions more accurately than what
is possible with conventional signals obtained from the user during
information search sessions. The preliminary evidence from a user

1304

