Workshop

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

SIGIR 2018 Workshop on ExplainAble Recommendation
and Search (EARS 2018)
Yongfeng Zhang

Department of Computer Science
Rutgers University
yongfeng.zhang@rutgers.edu

Yi Zhang

School of Engineering
University of California Santa Cruz
yiz@soe.ucsc.edu

systems as blank-boxes for end users, and the lack of explainability
weakens the persuasiveness and trustworthiness of the system for
users, making explainable recommendation and search important
research issues to the IR community.
In a broader sense, researchers in the whole artificial intelligence
community have also realized the importance of Explainable AI,
which aims to address a wide range of AI explainability problems
in deep learning, computer vision, automatic driving systems, and
natural language processing tasks. As an important branch of AI
research, this further highlights the importance and urgency for
our IR/RecSys community to address the explainability issues of
various recommendation and search systems.

ABSTRACT
Explainable recommendation and search attempt to develop models
or methods that not only generate high-quality recommendation
or search results, but also intuitive explanations of the results for
users or system designers, which can help to improve the system
transparency, persuasiveness, trustworthiness, and effectiveness,
etc. This is even more important in personalized search and recommendation scenarios, where users would like to know why a
particular product, web page, news report, or friend suggestion
exists in his or her own search and recommendation lists. The
workshop focuses on the research and application of explainable
recommendation and search, and gathers researchers as well as
practitioners in the field for discussions, idea communications, and
research promotions.

2

THEME AND PURPOSE

The purpose of the workshop is to gather researchers and practitioners of recommendation and search systems to communicate the
latest ideas and research achievements on explainable recommendation and search, discuss about the advantages and disadvantages of
existing approaches, and share the ideas of future directions of recommendation and search in the explanation perspective. Based on
this workshop, we would not only like to present the latest research
achievements, but also connect researchers in the community that
are interested in the explainable recommendation and search topic
to promote this direction in the following years.
The main themes and topics of the workshop include but are not
limited to:

ACM Reference Format:
Yongfeng Zhang, Yi Zhang, and Min Zhang. 2018. SIGIR 2018 Workshop
on ExplainAble Recommendation and Search (EARS 2018). In Proceedings
of The 41st International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research & Development
in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’18). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 3 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210193

1

Min Zhang

Department of Computer Science
Tsinghua University
z-m@tsinghua.edu.cn

MOTIVATION AND APPROPRIATENESS

The motivation of the workshop is to promote the research and
application of Explainable Recommendation and Search, under the
background of Explainable AI in a more general sense. Early recommendation and search systems adopted intuitive yet easily explainable models to generate recommendation and search lists, such as
user-based and item-based collaborative filtering for recommendation, which provide recommendations based on similar users
or items, or TF-IDF based retrieval models for search, which provide document ranking lists according to word similarity between
different documents.
However, state-of-the-art recommendation and search models
extensively rely on complex machine learning and latent representation models such as matrix factorization or even deep neural
networks, and they work with various types of information sources
such as ratings, text, images, audio or video signals. The complexity
nature of state-of-the-art models make search and recommendation

• New Models for Explainable Recommendation and Search
– Explainable shallow models
– Explainable neural models
– Explainable sequential modeling
– Explainable optimization theories
– Causal inference for explainable analysis
• Different Information Sources for Explanation
– Text-based modeling and explanation
– Image-based modeling and explanation
– Using knowledge-base for explanation
– Audio-based modeling and explanation
– Video-based modeling and explanation
– Integrating heterogenous information for explanation
• User Behavior Analysis and HCI for Explanation
– Explanation and user satisfaction
– Mouse movement analysis
– Eye tracking and attention modeling
• New Types of Explanations
– Textual sentence explanations
– Visual explanations
– Statistic-based explanations

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR ’18, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
© 2018 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5657-2/18/07. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210193

1411

Workshop

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

– Aggregated explanations
– Context-aware explanations
• Evaluation of Explainable Recommendation and Search
– Offline evaluation measures and protocols
– Online evaluation measures and protocols
– User study for explanation evaluation
• New Applications
– Explainable product recommendation and search
– Explainable social recommendation and search
– Explainable news recommendation and search
– Explainable POI recommendation and search
– Explainable multimedia recommendation and search

3

FORMAT AND PLANED ACTIVITIES

The workshop intends to be a half day workshop with a keynote
speech, several paper presentations, and a poster session to give
researchers opportunity for extensive discussions. The tentative
schedule of events include:

5

SUBMISSION AND SELECTION PROCESS

The workshop accepts both long and short papers. The maximum
length of long paper is 9 pages (plus up to 1 page of references).
Each accepted long paper is presented in a plenary session, and is
allocated a presentation slot in a poster session to encourage discussion and follow up between authors and attendees. The maximum
length of short paper is 4 pages (plus up to 1 page of references).
Each accepted short paper is presented in a spot-light session, and
is also allocated a presentation slot in a poster session to encourage discussion and follow up between authors and attendees. The
review process is double blind.

6

ORGANIZERS

Biography of the organizers and their main research experience
related to the proposed workshop topic are as follows.

• An industry keynote speech to highlight the importance
of explainable recommendation and search in real-world
system and business.
• A mixture of 5 to 10 long and short paper presentations.
• A poster session for researchers to communicate and make
discussions extensively.

4

Online Shopping Festival”. He is now responsible for the overall
international search algorithm team in Alibaba.

Yongfeng Zhang is an Assistant Professor in the Department of
Computer Science at Rutgers University (The State University of
New Jersey). His research interest is in Recommendation and Search
Systems, Economic Data Science, and Conversational Systems. In
the previous he was a postdoc in the Center for Intelligent Information Retrieval (CIIR) at UMass Amherst, and did his PhD and BE
in Computer Science at Tsinghua University, with a BS in Economics at Peking Univeristy. He is a Siebel Scholar of the class 2015,
and a Baidu Scholar of the class 2014. Together with coauthors, he
formally introduced the concept of Explainable Recommendation
in SIGIR 2014 [8], and has been consistently working on explainable recommendation and search models thereafter [1–7, 9]. His
recent work on explainability of search and recommendation models include visually explainable recommendation, knowledge base
embedding for explainable recommendation, natural language generation for explainable recommendation, as well as explainable
product search in e-commerce.

INDUSTRY KEYNOTE

Title: Shakespeare of Alibaba: Practice of Intelligent Recommendation Reason Generation in Alibaba.
Abstract: Explainable recommendation and search is a very promising topic in both academia and industry in the recent years. There
are many human generated recommendation reasons for products in Alibaba Taobao to improve user experience and to increase
user stickiness. However, relying on human-generated content will
result in low coverage, low quality stability, and high financial expenditure. With the rapid development of deep learning technology
in NLP, especially in the nature language generation field, we tried
natural language generation approach in recommendation reason
generation and achieved good results. We created recommendation reasons for auction and auction list, which covered millions
of product categories in Taobao e-commerce, and the generated
explanations were used for large-scale real-world transactions in
“2017 Double 11 Shopping Festival” without any manual checking.
Industry-level real system experiments show that it was very difficult to distinguish whether the explanations are machine-generated
or manually-written, and the content generation can be controlled
in multiple dimensions such as text style, text length, topics, etc. We
will introduce our solution and technical details about generating
free-text explanations in this keynote.

Yi Zhang is a professor in the School of Engineering, University
of California Santa Cruz. Her research interests include large scale
information retrieval, recommendation systems, internet advertising, data mining, natural language processing, and applied machine
learning. She has published chapters, journal articles, and papers
at top conferences in these areas, such ACM SIGIR, WWW, CIKM,
IEEE ICDM, ICML, COLINGS, HLT. She received NSF Faculty Early
Career Award in 2010, an Air Force Research Young Investigator
Award in 2008, the Best Paper Award at ACM SIGIR in 2002, and
several other awards. Her Information Retrieval and Knowledge
Management Lab is doing research sponsored by several government agencies and companies (Microsoft, Yahoo, Google, NEC,
Bosch, Nokia etc.). She has served as a consultant or technical advisor for companies. She regularly serves on the program committees
of the very best conferences in her research areas. She has served as
area chair or senior PC member at ACM SIGIR, EMNLP, and ACM
Recommender Systems. She has served as conference co-chair in
charge of Information Retrieval area at the ACM Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, and tutorial chair for ACM

Bio: Dr. Qingsong Hua has been working in Alibaba search algorithm team since 2013 and has led a lot of projects about search
relevance, quality, and conversion effectiveness. He is responsible for the intelligent recommendation reason generation project,
which won the biggest Alibaba technical award in “2017 Double 11

1412

Workshop

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

SIGIR. She is serving as an associate editor for ACM Transaction
on Information Systems. Dr. Zhang received her Ph.D. from School
of Computer Science at Carnegie Mellon University, specializing in
Language and Information Technologies.

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Min Zhang is an associate professor in the Department of Computer Science and Technology (DCST), Tsinghua University. She
received her Bachelor and PhD degrees from DCST at Tsinghua
University in 1999 and 2003, respectively. During the past years,
she has visited DFKI Germany, City University of HongKong, Kyoto
University, and MSRA as visiting researcher. Dr. Zhang specializes
in information retrieval, Web user behavior analysis and machine
learning. She has published more than 100 papers on important
international journals and conferences, such as JASIST, JIR, SIGIR,
WWW, WSDM, CIKM, etc. She has participated in TREC (Text REtrieval Conference) benchmarks as the team leader since 2002. Her
team has continuously achieved multiple top performances during
10 years. She also contributed in INTENT tasks in NTCIR evaluation as task co-organizer from 2011 to 2013. Dr. Zhang served as PC
chair at WSDM 2017, as well as area chairs or senior PC members at
CIKM and AIRS, and PC members at SIGIR, WWW, WSDM, KDD,
ACL, etc. Currently she is also the executive director of Tsinghua
University-Microsoft Research Asia Joint Research Lab on Media
and Search, and the vice director of Tsinghua-Sohu Joint Research
Lab of Search Technology.

7

Ruining He, Pinterest
Xiangnan He, National University of Singapore
Bart Knijnenburg, Clemson University
Aonghus Lawlor, University College Dublin
Piji Li, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Julian Mcauley, University of California San Diego
Sole Pera, Boise State University
Zhaochun Ren, JD Data Science Lab
Sungyong Seo, University of Southern California
Xiang Wang, National University of Singapore
Yao Wu, Twitter Inc
Hamed Zamani, University of Massachusetts Amherst

REFERENCES
[1] Xu Chen, Zheng Qin, Yongfeng Zhang, and Tao Xu. 2016. Learning to rank
features for recommendation over multiple categories. In Proceedings of the 39th
International ACM SIGIR conference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval. ACM, 305–314.
[2] Xu Chen, Hongteng Xu, Yongfeng Zhang, Jiaxi Tang, Yixin Cao, Hongyuan Zha,
and Zheng Qin. 2018. Sequential Recommendation with User Memory Networks.
In Proceedings of the eleventh ACM international conference on web search and
data mining. ACM.
[3] Xu Chen, Yongfeng Zhang, Hongteng Xu, Yixin Cao, Zheng Qin, and Hongyuan
Zha. 2018. Visually Explainable Recommendation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.10288
(2018).
[4] Yongfeng Zhang. 2014. Browser-oriented universal cross-site recommendation
and explanation based on user browsing logs. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM
Conference on Recommender systems. ACM, 433–436.
[5] Yongfeng Zhang. 2015. Incorporating phrase-level sentiment analysis on textual
reviews for personalized recommendation. In Proceedings of the eighth ACM
international conference on web search and data mining. ACM, 435–440.
[6] Yongfeng Zhang. 2017. Explainable Recommendation: Theory and Applications.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.06409 (2017).
[7] Yongfeng Zhang and Xu Chen. 2018. Explainable Recommendation: A Survey
and New Perspectives. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.11192 (2018).
[8] Yongfeng Zhang, Guokun Lai, Min Zhang, Yi Zhang, Yiqun Liu, and Shaoping
Ma. 2014. Explicit Factor Models for Explainable Recommendation based on
Phrase-level Sentiment Analysis. SIGIR (2014), 83–92.
[9] Yongfeng Zhang, Min Zhang, Yi Zhang, Guokun Lai, Yiqun Liu, Honghui Zhang,
and Shaoping Ma. 2015. Daily-aware personalized recommendation based on
feature-level time series analysis. In Proceedings of the 24th international conference on world wide web. International World Wide Web Conferences Steering
Committee, 1373–1383.

PROGRAM COMMITTEE MEMBERS

The following researchers act as the program committee members
of the workshop:
• Behnoush Abdollahi, University of Louisville
• Qingyao Ai, University of Massachusetts Amherst
• Rose Catherine, Carnegie Mellon University
• Xu Chen, Tsinghua University
• Michael Ekstrand, Boise State University

1413

