Workshop

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Second International Workshop on Conversational Approaches
to Information Retrieval (CAIR’18)
Workshop at SIGIR 2018
Jaime Arguello

University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, USA
jarguell@email.unc.edu

Filip Radlinski

Google
London, UK
filiprad@google.com

Damiano Spina

Julia Kiseleva

RMIT University
Melbourne, Australia
damiano.spina@rmit.edu.au

University of Amsterdam
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
j.kiseleva@uva.nl

CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems → Information retrieval;

KEYWORDS
Conversational Search, Information Retrieval, Discourse and Dialogue
ACM Reference Format:
Jaime Arguello, Filip Radlinski, Hideo Joho, Damiano Spina, and Julia Kiseleva. 2018. Second International Workshop on Conversational Approaches
to Information Retrieval (CAIR’18): Workshop at SIGIR 2018. In SIGIR ’18:
The 41st International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research & Development in
Information Retrieval, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 3 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210199

1

Hideo Joho

University of Tsukuba
Tsukuba, Japan
hideo@slis.tsukuba.ac.jp

MOTIVATION

Recent advances in automatic speech recognition (ASR) have changed
the way people interact with devices and search for information [5].
For example, based on a 2014 survey of 1,400 U.S. smartphone users,
50% of teenage users and 41% of adult users reported issuing at
least one mobile voice search per day [1]. Services such as Apple
Siri, Google Assistant, and Microsoft Cortana enable users to find
information using natural language spoken requests rather than
conventional keywords. Additionally, products such as Amazon
Echo, Apple HomePod, and Google Home have extended the context of speech-based information access from the mobile setting to
the office and home settings. Currently, these voice-enabled search
systems are able to respond to well-formulated commands and
queries. However, they are less capable of responding to ill-defined
information requests in a conversational manner.

The report from SWIRL 2012 also identified conversational approaches to information retrieval (IR) as an important area for
future research [2]. Moreover, research on evaluating speech-based
search interfaces has demonstrated that replicating the standard
approach of listing search results in response to a query is not
an effective mode of interaction over a speech-only channel [4].
Finally, at SWIRL 2018, conversational information seeking (CIS)
was identified as an area of research with great challenges and
opportunities.
We believe there is sufficient interest within the IR, dialogue, and
speech recognition/generation communities for CAIR’18. The 1st
International Workshop on Conversational Approaches to Information Retrieval (CAIR’17) was held at SIGIR 2017 [3] and had over 70
registered participants. The program included eight peer-reviewed
full paper presentations, two keynote talks, a panel discussion,
and a final open discussion. Ron Kaplan, Chief Scientist for Amazon Search (A9.com), and Jason D. Williams (Microsoft Research),
President of SIGDial (the leading community/conference on dialogue systems), gave the keynote presentations and shared their
perspectives on the current state of the art in speech-based services.
The panel discussion was chaired by Mark Sanderson (RMIT University) and focused on setting an agenda for future research in
conversational search. The panelists included Nick Belkin (Rutgers
University), James Allan (University of Massachusetts at Amherst),
Jason D. Williams, and Emine Yilmaz (University College London).
CAIR’17 also had several follow-up activities. For example, JASIST had a special call for papers on conversational approaches to
information access and retrieval and SIGDial 2018 will be hosting
a special session on Conversational Approaches to Information
Search, Retrieval, and Presentation.

2

PURPOSE OF THE WORKSHOP

The 2nd International Workshop on Conversational Approaches
to Information Retrieval (CAIR’18)1 will bring together academic
and industry researchers and developers to advance conversational
approaches to search applications. We are open to a variety of

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’18, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
© 2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5657-2/18/07.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210199

1 https://sites.google.com/view/cair-ws/cair-2018

1435

Workshop

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Table 1: A tentative schedule.

modalities of conversation, including speech-based interaction, textbased interaction, or multimodal interaction (e.g., audio-in, text-out
or multiple simultaneous modalities). We also welcome studies
investigating human-human interaction (e.g., collaborative search),
which can inform the design of conversational search applications.

2.1

Duration (min)

Topics of interest

The workshop welcomes a broad range of studies that can contribute to the development of conversational approaches to IR. Topics of interest include (but are not limited to):
Query understanding and search process management.
•
•
•
•
•
•

Processing verbose natural language queries
Processing noisy ASR queries
Query intent disambiguation, clarification, confirmation
Relevance feedback in conversational search
Voice-based search engine operations
Dialogue schema for conversational search

4

Search result description (presentation).
•
•
•
•
•

05
60
15
15
45
60

Opening
Invited talk 1
Hands-on with commercial devices
Coffee break
Paper session 1 (2–4 talks)
Panel discussion

90

Lunch break with Poster presentation

60
45
15
45
60

Invited talk 2
Paper session 2 (2–4 talks)
Coffee break
Paper session 3 (2–4 talks)
Open discussion + Closing

RELATED WORKSHOPS

Several workshops related to conversational IR were held in 2016
and 2017. The Search-Oriented Conversational AI Workshop (SCAI’17)
was held in conjunction with the 3rd ACM International Conference
on the Theory of Information Retrieval (ICTIR’17) in October 2017
and the second edition will be co-located with the 2018 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP)
in late 2018.2 The workshop has an emphasis on artificial intelligence (AI) technologies on this subject. While AI technologies
are important, CAIR’18 welcomes a broader range of approaches
to conversational search. The Conversational Agents in Collaborative Action Workshop3 was held in conjunction with the 20th
ACM conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work and
Social Computing (CSCW’17) in February 2017. Finally, the First
Intelligent Conversational User Interface Workshop (ICUI’17)4 was
held at the 22nd Annual Meeting of the Intelligent User Interfaces
Community (IUI’17) in March 2017. These workshops indicate a
strong interest in conversational interfaces for different applications. CAIR’18 will focus on search application and behaviors.
Somewhat related to CAIR’18, the ProActive Information Retrieval Workshop (ProActIR)5 was held in conjunction with the
38th European Conference in Information Retrieval (ECIR’16) in
March 2016. This workshop focused on the development and evaluation of systems that are able to anticipate and address users’
information needs in a proactive manner.

Audio-based search result presentation and summarization
Conversational navigation of search results
Knowledge graph presentation in conversational search
Conversational navigation of search results
Advertisements in audio-based search result presentation

Ranking algorithms.
• Ad-hoc spoken search
• Spoken search in session
Evaluation.
• Building test collections for conversational search
• Development of new metrics to measure effectiveness, engagement, satisfaction of conversational search
Applications.
• Intelligent personal assistance
• Intelligent home assistance using voice / speech oriented
devices
• Proactive search/Recommendation
• Collaborative search
• Hands free search (e.g., in car, kitchen)
• Search for visually impaired users
• Search for low literacy users
• Integration with existing technologies

5
3

Event

FORMAT AND PLANNED ACTIVITIES

ORGANIZERS

Jaime Arguello (University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill) is an
Associate Professor at the School of Information and Library Science at UNC Chapel Hill. His research interests include aggregated
search, task-based search, and spoken query understanding and
re-formulation. Jaime was co-organizer of CAIR’17, co-organizer

CAIR’18 plans to organize a full-day workshop, consisting of two
keynote presentations, a hands-on interactive session with existing
devices (e.g., Amazon Echo and Google Home), a panel discussion,
and a final open discussion. Additionally, the workshop will have
5–10 long- and short-paper presentations. A tentative schedule of
events is shown in Table 1. To attract participants to the workshop,
we plan to have two keynote presentations—one from a leading
industrial organization that works on speech-based products and
another leading expert from an academic institution.

2 http://scai.info/

3 https://talkingwithagents.wordpress.com/

4 https://iuiworkshop.github.io/

5 https://sites.google.com/site/proactir/

1436

Workshop

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

of the SIGIR 2015 RIGOR Workshop, Treasurer of CHIIR 2016, coorganizer of the 2013 NSF Workshop on Task-based Search, and is
currently the SIGIR Travel Awards Chair (2015–present).
Filip Radlinski (Google) is a research scientist at Google, London,
UK and an honorary lecturer in computer science at University College London. His recent research interests include conversational
recommendation, personalized search and search evaluation. He
was recently PC co-chair of WSDM 2016. Filip is a co-organiser
of Special Session on Conversational Approaches to Information
Search, Retrievals, and Presentation at SIGDial 2018, and was a
co-organiser of CAIR’17.
Hideo Joho (University of Tsukuba) is an Associate Professor at
the University of Tsukuba, and visiting scholar of NII and RMIT University. His recent research interests include collaborative search,
lifelog search, and test collections. Dr. Joho is a PC co-chair of
CHIIR 2019, and has been a General co-chair of SIGIR 2017, and
associate editor of IP&M (2014–16). Hideo is a liaison officer of
SIGIR and SIGDial, co-organiser of the SIGDial 2018 special session
on conversational search, and was a co-organiser of CAIR’17.
Damiano Spina (RMIT University) is a Research Fellow at RMIT
University. His recent research interests include interactive information retrieval and evaluation. Dr. Spina is an editorial board member
of IP&M. Damiano is a co-organiser of the SIGDial 2018 special
session on conversational search and was a steering committee
member of CAIR’17.
Julia Kiseleva (UserSat.com & UvA) Julia is currently running the
spin-off UseSat.com and is a postdoctoral researcher at University
of Amsterdam. She received her PhD from the University of Eindhoven in 2016. The focus of Julia’s research is on understanding
and predicting user satisfaction with a variety of search systems.
Currently, Julia is mostly focused on understanding user interaction
patterns with personal assistants such as Siri, Google Assistant and
Cortana.

5.1

Steering Committee

The steering committee includes the following members.
• Lawrence Cavedon (RMIT University)
• Fernando Diaz (Spotify)
• Dilek Hakkani-Tür (Google)
• Mark Sanderson (RMIT University)
• Milad Shokouhi (Microsoft)

5.2

Current PC Members

The CAIR’18 PC members include:
• Jeffrey Dalton (University of Glasgow)
• Ido Guy (Yahoo Research)
• Claudia Hauff (Delft University of Technology)
• Jiepu Jiang (UMass Amherst)
• Gareth Jones (Dublin City University)
• Ben Lambert (Spotify)
• Karthik Raghunathan (MindMeld)
• Paul Thomas (Microsoft)
• Johanne R. Trippas (RMIT University)
• Imed Zitouni (Microsoft)

REFERENCES
[1] [n. d.]. OMG! Mobile voice survey reveals teens love to talk. https://googleblog.
blogspot.ru/2014/10/omg-mobile-voice-survey-reveals-teens.html. Accessed:
2018-04-30.
[2] James Allan, Bruce Croft, Alistair Moffat, and Mark Sanderson. 2012. Frontiers,
Challenges, and Opportunities for Information Retrieval: Report from SWIRL 2012
the Second Strategic Workshop on Information Retrieval in Lorne. SIGIR Forum
46, 1 (2012), 2–32.
[3] Hideo Joho, Lawrence Cavedon, Jaime Arguello, Milad Shokouhi, and Filip Radlinski. 2017. CAIR’17: First International Workshop on Conversational Approaches
to Information Retrieval. SIGIR Forum 51, 3 (2017), 114–121.
[4] Nuzhah Gooda Sahib, Anastasios Tombros, and Tony Stockman. 2012. A Comparative Analysis of the Information-seeking Behavior of Visually Impaired and
Sighted Searchers. JASIST 63, 2 (2012), 377–391.
[5] W. Xiong, J. Droppo, X. Huang, F. Seide, M. Seltzer, A. Stolcke, D. Yu, and G. Zweig.
2016. Achieving Human Parity in Conversational Speech Recognition. ArXiv
e-prints (2016).

1437

