Workshop

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Computational Surprise in Information Retrieval
Xi Niu

Wlodek Zadrozny

University of North Carolina at Charlotte
xniu2@uncc.edu

University of North Carolina at Charlotte
wzadrozn@uncc.edu

Kazjon Grace

Weimao Ke

University of Sydney
kazjon.grace@sydney.edu.au

Drexel University
wk@drexel.edu
unexpected exploration and discovery. Meanwhile, Facebook has
admitted that its algorithms form "echo chambers" [2]. The notion
of "filter bubbles" [4] are one of the prime motivations behind this
workshop on computational surprise - bursting the bubble through
thoughtful design of digital systems.
Natural human information seeking processes are full of surprises, from finding a movie at a friend’s house to scientific breakthroughs like the discovery of X-rays. Miksa [10] described human
acquisition of information as a relatively unfocused sense of inquiry, and said that information seeking is “better conceived as
an exploratory and game-like mechanism rather than a precise
response mechanism". However, even today, very few information
retrieval systems support systematically discovering surprise. Computational models of surprise are in their infancy, due to the vague
and elusive nature of the concept. In addition, surprise by nature
contradicts intention and control. The result is that the word surprise remains imprecisely defined, relying on its use in everyday
vocabulary. How to scientifically quantify surprise and how to
incorporate it into IR systems are issues of ongoing research.
This workshop brings together researchers and practitioners to
identify a set of core research questions in computational surprise.
This will include discussion of a broad, multi-purpose research
agenda. First, research collaboration: it is a networking opportunity
intending to promote rigorous research on computational surprise
in IR. Second, support for researchers: it will help attract research
funding and resources in this area. Finally, it will help broaden the
definition of information retrieval at the SIGIR conference.
This workshop will also discuss the challenge of data availability.
Any machine learning or computational approach highly relies on
high quality corpus that requires human intelligence. So far such
data that contains human annotations or evaluations on surprise
is not easily available. We expect that the discussion on data will
result in a collaborative effort for producing such a dataset.

ABSTRACT
The concept of surprise is central to human learning and development. However, compared to accuracy, surprise has received little
attention in the IR community, yet it is an essential component of
the information seeking process. This workshop brings together
researchers and practitioners of IR to discuss the topic of computational surprise, to set a research agenda, and to examine how to
build datasets for research into this fascinating topic. The themes
in this workshop include discussion of what can be learned from
some well-known surprise models in other fields, such as Bayesian
surprise; how to evaluate surprise based on user experience; and
how computational surprise is related to the newly emerging areas,
such as fake news detection, computational contradiction, clickbait
detection, etc.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems → Information retrieval; Users and
interactive retrieval; Personalization; Novelty in information
retrieval; Recommender systems; Evaluation of retrieval results; Information retrieval diversity; Clustering and classification;

KEYWORDS
surprise, computational models, evaluation
ACM Reference Format:
Xi Niu, Wlodek Zadrozny, Kazjon Grace, and Weimao Ke. 2018. Computational Surprise in Information Retrieval. In SIGIR ’18: The 41st International
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval,
July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 3 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210197

1

MOTIVATION

Today we are exposed to vast amounts of information online and
we often cope by paying attention to what well-known search
engines or recommender systems can provide. Current information retrieval systems have been criticized as reinforcement of the
same, relatively limited set of information rather than promoting

2

THEMES

Themes in this workshop include but are not limited to:

2.1

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR ’18, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
© 2018 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5657-2/18/07. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210197

What can we learn from established
surprise models in other disciplines?

Surprise models have been studied in several other fields. In cognitive science, surprise has been described as the events that are
different from one’s expectations [9] or are difficult to explain [5].
In neuroscience surprise-seeking is a well-documented human trait.
It has been suggested that only the surprising signal at one stage
is transmitted to the next stage [11]. Itti and Baldi [7] introduce a

1427

Workshop

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

computational contradiction may be relevant to identifying surprise. NLP researchers and computational linguists have developed
various machine learning models and annotated corpora [12] to
predict contradictions between a pair of statements. How to adapt
their results into the context of surprise identification is worth
discussion.
Clickbait detection. Clickbait is a term commonly used to describe eye-catching and teaser headlines in online media. The motivation of clickbait is typically to improve click-through rates. Existing clickbait detection approaches utilize various linguistic features
extracted from teaser messages, linked webpages, and tweet meta
information. Even though surprising information is not clickbait,
analysis of clickbait headlines could help understand what makes a
piece of information attractive and curiosity-inspiring.

Bayesian surprise model to identify the surprising spots in a video
using the difference between a prior visual feature distribution (expectation) and a posterior visual feature distribution (observation).
In computational creativity, Grace et al. [6] model expectation by
building regression models of the relationships between attributes
of a design. A violation of these expectations is deemed a surprise.
In natural language processing, researchers have built various machine learning models to find contradictions and disagreements in
text (e.g., [8][3][13]). What can we learn from these models for IR
researchers to "engineer" surprise into search engines and recommender systems? The surprise model for text-based information
may be different from videos. How can we model surprise for the
various formats of information objects?
It is worth distinguishing between surprise and novelty despite
their substantial overlap in the context of IR. How has novelty
been operationalized, and how does that differ from definitions of
surprise?

2.2

3

How to evaluate surprise in IR

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

As claimed by Itti and Baldi [7], surprise is subjective and related
to the observer’s expectations. Accordingly we believe that offline
evaluation without user involvement is not sufficient. Even when
performing user studies, there is a wide range of user factors that
could potentially impact how users evaluate surprise, such as background knowledge, culture, demographics, etc. In addition, users
may have different preferences for the level of surprise they want
to experience. The challenge is to tailor the optimization to such
different preferences. An equally important challenge is that different domains may require different levels of surprise. For instance, a
surprise-enhancing algorithm may not suit a social media website,
where surprise in recommending friends is not as desirable as in a
movie recommender. How can surprise be modelled to account for
different users’ preferences in different domains?
We additionally believe that (positive) surprise is not only useful
or interesting to users, but also curiosity-inspiring. This curiosity
may motivate users to seek more surprising discoveries. How can
the impact of surprising discoveries on curiosity and longer-term
behavior and learning be evaluated? These are the challenges for
the IR research community.

2.3

WORKSHOP FORMAT

This half day workshop includes an invited speaker, a panel, and a
poster session. The activities are scheduled as the following:
09:00-09:30 Welcome and Introduction.
09:30-10:20 Invited speaker (on computational surprise)
10:20-10:30 Coffee break
10:30-11:20 Panel discussion
11:20-11:30 Coffee break
11:30-12:30 Poster session
12:30-13:30 Summary and lunch

A call asking not only for research posters, but also for position
and opinion papers has been circulated. All submitted posters and
papers will be single-blind, peer reviewed by an international program committee of researchers of high reputation. Accepted posters
and papers will be presented at the poster session.

4

ORGANIZERS

Dr. Xi Niu is Assistant Professor at the Department of Software and
Information Systems at the University of North Carolina at Charlotte. Her research is in the intersection of data analytics, search
behavior, interactive information retrieval. She has published in a
number of publications in ACM conferences and journals and received research grants from NSF and industries. Her recent projects
include text mining for serendipitous recommendation, transaction
log analysis of e-commerce websites, and analyzing user-generated
contents.
Dr.Wlodek Zadrozny is Associate Professor at the University
of North Carolina in Charlotte. His research focuses on natural
language understanding and its applications in various areas. Before
joining UNC Charlotte, Dr. Zadrozny had been working for 27 years
as a research scientist at IBM T.J. Watson Research Center. He was
the technical leader in building the first application of Watson (for
customer care). He led and contributed to a wide range of projects at
IBM, including a semantic search application for sales professionals,
natural language dialogue systems applied in banking and web sales,
and a value net analysis of intangible assets. Dr. Zadrozny published
over fifty refereed papers on various aspects of text processing; he
is an author of over thirty patents granted and about twenty patents
pending.
Dr.Kazjon Graceis the Program Director of the Bachelor in Design Computing at the University of Sydney, and teaches design

Computational surprise and other related
areas

We may further point out some newly emerging areas that are related to computational surprise. We aim to discuss the implications
of these areas for computational surprise.
Fake news detection. Fake news is supposedly journalistic content that is intentionally false and designed to mislead readers[1].
Fake news detection usually analyzes linguistic cues and auxiliary
information (such as the network structure of news diffusion) to
build features and construct machine learning models. Although
surprising information is not necessarily fake news, some indicators (skeptical opinions, sensational words, exaggeration, etc) are
common to both.
Contradiction identification. Since surprise may come from
the contradiction of a confidently-held expectation, research on

1428

Workshop

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

programming and physical computing within that program. His
research spans computational design, computational creativity, HCI
and AI. Funded by NSF, he develops computational models of novelty, surprise, and curiosity, and investigates how they can help
people make decisions.
Dr. Weimao Ke is Associate Professor at the College of Computing and Informatics at Drexel University. His research is centered
on information retrieval (IR), particularly the investigation of intelligent systems that support better connection and interaction between people and information. His recent focus is on decentralized
IR functions that can adapt and scale in continuously growing and
increasingly interconnected information spaces. His broad interests
also include complex networks/systems, text mining, information
visualization, bibliometrics, machine learning, multi-agent systems,
and the notion of information.

5

[3] Qian Chen, Xiaodan Zhu, Zhen-Hua Ling, Si Wei, Hui Jiang, and Diana Inkpen.
2017. Enhanced lstm for natural language inference. In Proceedings of the 55th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers), Vol. 1. 1657–1668.
[4] Pariser Eli. 2011. The Filter Bubble: What the Internet Is Hiding from You. London:
Viking (2011).
[5] Meadhbh Foster and Mark T Keane. 2013. Surprise: Youve got some explaining
to do. arXiv preprint arXiv:1308.2236 (2013).
[6] Kazjon Grace, Mary Lou Maher, Douglas Fisher, and Katherine Brady. 2015.
Data-intensive evaluation of design creativity using novelty, value, and surprise.
International Journal of Design Creativity and Innovation 3, 3-4 (2015), 125–147.
[7] Laurent Itti and Pierre F Baldi. 2006. Bayesian surprise attracts human attention.
In Advances in neural information processing systems. 547–554.
[8] Marie-Catherine Marneffe, Anna N Rafferty, and Christopher D Manning. 2008.
Finding contradictions in text. Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT (2008), 1039–1047.
[9] Wulf-Uwe Meyer, Rainer Reisenzein, and Achim Schützwohl. 1997. Toward a
process analysis of emotions: The case of surprise. Motivation and Emotion 21, 3
(1997), 251–274.
[10] Francis L Miksa. 1992. Library and information science: two paradigms. Conceptions of library and information science: historical, empirical and theoretical
perspectives. Londres, Los Angeles: Taylor Graham (1992), 229–252.
[11] Rajesh PN Rao and Dana H Ballard. 1999. Predictive coding in the visual cortex:
a functional interpretation of some extra-classical receptive-field effects. Nature
neuroscience 2, 1 (1999), 79–87.
[12] Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel R Bowman. 2017. A broad-coverage
challenge corpus for sentence understanding through inference. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1704.05426 (2017).
[13] Wlodek Zadrozny, Hossein Hematialam, and Luciana Garbayo. 2017. Towards Semantic Modeling of Contradictions and Disagreements: A Case Study of Medical
Guidelines. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.00850 (2017).

PARTICIPATION

This workshop is open to all interested parties.

REFERENCES
[1] Hunt Allcott and Matthew Gentzkow. 2017. Social media and fake news in the
2016 election. Journal of Economic Perspectives 31, 2 (2017), 211–36.
[2] Eytan Bakshy, Solomon Messing, and Lada A Adamic. 2015. Exposure to ideologically diverse news and opinion on Facebook. Science 348, 6239 (2015), 1130–1132.

1429

