Workshop

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

First International Workshop on Professional Search (ProfS2018)
Co-located with SIGIR 2018
Suzan Verberne

Leiden University
s.verberne@liacs.leidenuniv.nl

Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica
jiyinhe@acm.org

Jiyin He

Udo Kruschwitz

Birger Larsen

Tony Russell-Rose

Arjen P. de Vries

Aalborg University
birger@hum.aau.dk

UXLabs
tgr@uxlabs.co.uk

Radboud University
arjen@acm.org

are different from requirements of generic web search engines.
These requirements follow directly from the context and needs of
professional searchers: Searchers in different domains often exhibit
particular search behavior different from general Web search [4, 7].
These unique behavioral patterns can be both a nature of the profession as well as a result of using a particular professional search
tool. The differences between professional search and ad hoc web
search can be summarized in three key characteristics:

ABSTRACT
Professional search is a problem area in which many facets of information retrieval are addressed, both system-related (e.g. distributed
search) and user-related (e.g. complex information needs), and the
interface between user and system (e.g. supporting exploratory
search tasks). Professional search tasks have specific requirements,
different from the requirements of generic web search. The aim
of this workshop is to bring together researchers to work on the
requirements and challenges of professional search from different
angles. We will have an interactive workshop where researchers
not only present their scientific results but also work together on
the definition of future challenges and solutions with input from
information professionals. The workshop will deliver a roadmap of
research directions for the years to come.

Heterogeneous information sources. Often professional searchers
need to collect and synthesize information from various sources, in
different modalities, and perhaps in different languages. For example, academic researchers typically find information across multiple
resources using multiple different search tools [2]. And assisting
users to discover related materials in the right work context has
shown to be useful for law professionals [8].

CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems → Specialized information retrieval;
Users and interactive retrieval;

Highly interactive procedure. The information tasks that professional users need to accomplish often involve multiple stages.
Therefore, they commonly exhibit exploratory search behavior
with relatively complex queries and long sessions. The information needs are typically high-value and often recall-oriented, and
include activities beyond search such as analysis, updating, and
monitoring [1, 9].

KEYWORDS
professional search, domain-specific search, complex search tasks,
user requirements
ACM Reference Format:
Suzan Verberne, Jiyin He, Udo Kruschwitz, Birger Larsen, Tony Russell-Rose,
and Arjen P. de Vries. 2018. First International Workshop on Professional
Search (ProfS2018): Co-located with SIGIR 2018. In SIGIR ’18: The 41st International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
Article 4, 4 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210198

1

University of Essex
udo@essex.ac.uk

Highly specialized activities. Searchers in professional contexts
are often engaged with information tasks that are highly complex.
Where web search engines largely rely on clickthrough data to
determine relevance of a search result, clickthrough popularity is
less useful as a ranking criterion in professional search because the
information needs are highly specific and the amount of click data
available from other users is limited [3].

MOTIVATION

Professional search in specific domains has been addressed in IR
research over the last decades. Although each domain (e.g. legal,
medical, academic, governmental) has its own idiosyncrasies, professional search tasks have specific requirements in common that

The workshop addresses these requirements from multiple angles; covering many different facets of professional search (see Section 2). We envisage a highly interactive workshop (see Section 3)
where researchers work with input from information professionals
to their mutual benefit. The workshop will deliver a roadmap of
research directions for the years to come.
Successful related workshops were organized in 2013, 2015 and
2017, co-located with ECIR and CHIIR (see Section 7). SIGIR is a key
venue that attracts researchers in IR, Information Sciences, HumanComputer Interaction, and Natural Language Processing from all
over the world. The workshop provides the opportunity to work

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR ’18, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
© 2018 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5657-2/18/07.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210198

1431

Workshop

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Table 1: Workshop schedule
9:15 - 9:30
9:30 - 10:00
10:00 - 10:30
10:30 - 11:15
11:15 - 12:00
12:00 - 13:30
13:30 - 14:15
14:15 - 15:00
15:00 - 15:30
15:30 - 16:30
16:30 - 17:00

3.1

Introduction
Presentation of survey results
Coffee Break I
Keynote 1: Paul Bennett
3 oral presentations
Lunch
Keynote 2: David D. Lewis
3 oral presentations
Coffee Break II
Breakout session
Reports from the breakout sessions & conclusions

with people from multiple fields (both scientific and professionally)
on a common challenge: IR in professional contexts.

2

THEME AND PURPOSE

We invited submissions in one or more of the following (not exclusive) topics:
• distributed and federated search in professional search environments;
• multi-modal and multi-lingual search in professional environments;
• supporting exploratory search and complex, high-value search
tasks;
• the collection and analysis of information needs in professional search domains;
• comparison of search needs, approaches and behavior patterns across different professions;
• the evaluation of longitudinal, recall-oriented tasks;
• multi-faceted evaluation of professional search tasks;
• analysis of session log data for complex search tasks;
• beyond the search engine result page: browsing, reading,
analyzing and using retrieval results;
• personalization and information recommendation for professional search;
• search applications in a professional context (such as enterprise search, e-discovery and email search);
• the evaluation and improvement of specialized search tools
in working environments.
These topics cover a broad range of IR technologies, all needed
to address the requirements of professional search.

3

Keynote speakers
• Paul Bennett, Microsoft Research: “Search and Recommendation in the Enterprise”
Paul Bennett is the Principal Research Manager of the Information & Data Sciences group in Microsoft Research AI.
His published research has focused on a variety of topics
surrounding the use of machine learning in information
retrieval - including ensemble methods and the combination of information sources, calibration, consensus methods
for noisy supervision labels, active learning and evaluation,
supervised classification and ranking, crowdsourcing, behavioral modeling and analysis, and personalization. Some of
his work has been recognized with awards at SIGIR, CHI,
and ACM UMAP as well as an ECIR Test of Time Honorable Mention award. Prior to joining MSR in 2006, he completed his dissertation in the Computer Science Department
at Carnegie Mellon with Jaime Carbonell and John Lafferty.
While at CMU, he also acted as the Chief Learning Architect
on the RADAR project from 2005-2006 while a postdoctoral
fellow in the Language Technologies Institute.
• Dave Lewis, Brainspace – A Cyxtera Business: “IR Research Challenges in Legal Discovery and Investigations”
David D. Lewis, Ph.D. is Chief Data Scientist at Brainspace, A
Cyxtera Business. He leads the data science team developing
new information retrieval, machine learning, and natural
language processing technologies for legal, investigatory,
and intelligence applications. He is a Fellow of the American Society for the Advancement of Science, and won a
Test of Time Award from SIGIR in 2017 for his 1994 paper
introducing the uncertainty sampling algorithm for active
learning.

3.2

Involvement of information professionals

We have a large network of organizations (companies and governments) in which we work together with professionals – the target
group of the professional search applications that are the object of
our research. In the months before the workshop (May/June 2018)
we have distributed a short survey in our network (and we asked
the workshop participants to do as well) to gather the experiences
of our target group with professional IR: which systems do they
use, what do they like about them, what functionalities do they
miss, and what aspects/challenges do they think should be on the
research roadmap for professional search. The workshop will start
with a presentation of the results from the survey (prepared by the
organizers), and the requirements will be further addressed in the
breakout session.

FORMAT AND PLANNED ACTIVITIES

The workshop schedule is in Table 1. The workshop will be a mix of
keynotes, short oral presentations, and posters, as well as a breakout session in which there is time to focus the discussion on specific
topics.

3.3

Presentations

Papers that are more suitable for an interactive discussion on specific topics, are selected as posters. Papers that are of general interest
– such as position papers – are selected as oral presentations. Each
speaker will have a 15 minutes time slot, including 5 minutes for
questions and discussions.

1432

Workshop

3.4

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

domain specific search, understanding user intents and exploiting context in IR, as well as Informetrics/Bibliometrics,
citation analysis and academic search. He was co-creator of
the iSearch academic search test collection (built on arXiv
documents and complex topics from physicists). He has coorganised a number of related workshops, including ‘Task
Based and Aggregated Search’ (ECIR 2012), ‘Integrating
IR technologies for Professional Search’ (ECIR 2013) and
‘Bibliometric-enhanced Information Retrieval’ (ECIR 2014).
• Tony Russell-Rose, UXlabs, Guildford, UK. Tony Russell-Rose
is director of UXLabs, a user experience consultancy and innovations lab specialising in complex search and information
access applications. Previously Tony has led R&D teams at
Canon, Reuters, Oracle, HP Labs and BT Labs. He is author of
"Designing the Search Experience: the Information Architecture of Discovery" (Elsevier, 2013) [10] and publishes widely
on search, text analytics and human-computer interaction.
He holds a PhD in Computer Science and a first degree in
engineering, majoring in human factors.
• Suzan Verberne, Leiden University, the Netherlands. Suzan
Verberne is an assistant professor at the Leiden Institute for
Advanced Computer Science of Leiden University. She is
involved in projects involving text mining and information
retrieval in a large number of application domains, many
of which in collaboration with professionals [12, 13]. She
supervises projects involving information retrieval in the
legal domain, the archaeological domain, and the policymaking domain. She has co-organized multiple (national
and international) workshops and conferences and was local
organization chair for IIiX 2012.
• Arjen P. de Vries, Radboud University, the Netherlands. Arjen
P. de Vries holds the chair of Information Retrieval at the
Faculty of Science at Radboud University. He coordinates the
Data Science specialisation in the Computer Science Master’s
programme. His research aims to resolve the question how
users and systems may cooperate to improve information
access, with a specific focus on the value of a combination of
structured and unstructured information representations. He
co-founded Spinque, a small enterprise that develops search
technology for information specialists in application areas
including digital heritage, e-commerce and e-health.

Breakout session

In addition to plenary presentations (posters and talks), we will
have a breakout session in which attendees will form and self-assign
to groups addressing different requirements collected the survey
held among information professionals. The goal of this session is
to identify and define the major challenges in professional search
and prioritise research directions. Each breakout session will be
chaired and prepared by a member of the organising team. After
the breakout session one participant from each group will report
and summarise the conclusions of the group.

3.5

Synergy and future directions

Intended outcome, apart from publishing the proceedings online
as CEUR-WS.org workshop proceedings, is a research roadmap
and workshop report for SIGIR Forum in which the outcome of
the survey, the presentations and discussions in this workshop are
summarized. This way, we will draw the research community’s
attention to the importance of professional search as research domain.

4

SELECTION PROCESS

We have called for research papers and position papers, all of which
have four pages ACM style as page limit. The selection of papers
is based on relevance, quality and diversity. The workshop is also
open for papers presenting work in progress and challenges of new
projects. This way, we would like to have interesting discussions
about the direction of the research area.
A limited number of research papers will be selected for short
presentations (15 minutes including discussion); we allow sufficient
room and time for poster presentations.
Each submission will be reviewed by three reviewers and coordinated by one meta reviewer.

5

ORGANIZERS
• Jiyin He, CWI, the Netherlands. Jiyin He is a postdoctoral
researcher at the National Research Institute for Mathematics
and Computer Science (CWI), the Netherlands. Her research
interest is interactive information retrieval, with a focus on
the understanding and modeling of user behavioral patterns
with respect to diverse types of search interfaces and complex
information tasks. She has co-organized several workshops
at international conferences including the Search as Learning
workshop series at IIiX 2014 and SIGIR 2016.
• Udo Kruschwitz, University of Essex, UK. Udo Kruschwitz
is a professor at the University of Essex. His main research
interest is the interface between information retrieval (IR)
and natural language processing (NLP) with a particular
focus on enterprise search (he is the author of "Searching
the Enterprise", published in the FnTIR series in 2017 [6]).
He has co-organised a range of past events including the
Gamification for IR (GamifIR) workshop at SIGIR 2016 and
the Industry Track at SIGIR 2012.
• Birger Larsen, Aalborg University, Denmark. Birger Larsen
is professor of Information Retrieval and Information Analytics. His research interests are XML IR and user interaction,

6

PROGRAM COMMITTEE

We compiled a program committee with academic researchers as
well as practitioners:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

1433

Allan Hanbury
Charlie Hull
David Elsweiler
Diane Kelly
Elaine Toms
Farhad Shokraneh
Jaap Kamps
Julie Glanville
Krisztian Balog
Laura Dietz
Martin White

Workshop

•
•
•
•
•
•

7

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Michail Salampasis
Mihai Lupu
Norbert Fuhr
Peter Cotroneo
Ray Daley
Rene Spijker

REFERENCES
[1] Jiyin He, Marc Bron, and Arjen P de Vries. 2013. Characterizing stages of a multisession complex search task through direct and indirect query modifications.
In Proceedings of the 36th international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and
development in information retrieval. ACM, 897–900.
[2] Bradley M Hemminger, Dihui Lu, KTL Vaughan, and Stephanie J Adams. 2007.
Information seeking behavior of academic scientists. Journal of the American
Society for Information Science and Technology 58, 14 (2007), 2205–2225.
[3] Zhipeng Huang, Bogdan Cautis, Reynold Cheng, and Yudian Zheng. 2016. KBEnabled Query Recommendation for Long-Tail Queries. In Proceedings of the 25th
ACM International on Conference on Information and Knowledge Management.
ACM, 2107–2112.
[4] Rezarta Islamaj Dogan, G. Craig Murray, AurÃľlie NÃľvÃľol, and Zhiyong Lu.
2009. Understanding PubMedÂő user search behavior through log analysis.
Database 2009 (2009). https://doi.org/10.1093/database/bap018
[5] Marijn Koolen, Jaap Kamps, Toine Bogers, Nicholas Belkin, Diane Kelly, and
Emine Yilmaz. 2017. Report on the Second Workshop on Supporting Complex
Search Tasks. SIGIR Forum 51, 1 (Aug. 2017), 58–66. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3130332.3130343
[6] Udo Kruschwitz and Charlie Hull. 2017. Searching the Enterprise. Foundations
and Trends in Information Retrieval 11, 1 (2017), 1–142. https://doi.org/10.1561/
1500000053
[7] Carol Collier Kuhlthau and Stephanie L Tama. 2001. Information search process of lawyers: a call forâĂŹjust for meâĂŹinformation services. Journal of
documentation 57, 1 (2001), 25–43.
[8] Qiang Lu and Jack G. Conrad. 2012. Bringing Order to Legal Documents An
Issue-based Recommendation System via Cluster Association. (2012).
[9] Stephann Makri, Ann Blandford, and Anna L Cox. 2008. Investigating the
information-seeking behaviour of academic lawyers: From EllisâĂŹs model to
design. Information Processing & Management 44, 2 (2008), 613–634.
[10] Tony Russell-Rose and Tyler Tate. 2013. Designing the Search Experience: The
Information Architecture of Discovery. Elsevier (Morgan Kaufmann).
[11] Michail Salampasis, Norbert Fuhr, Allan Hanbury, Mihai Lupu, Birger Larsen,
and Henrik Strindberg. 2013. Integrating IR Technologies for Professional Search.
In Advances in Information Retrieval, Pavel Serdyukov, Pavel Braslavski, Sergei O.
Kuznetsov, Jaap Kamps, Stefan Rüger, Eugene Agichtein, Ilya Segalovich, and
Emine Yilmaz (Eds.). Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 882–885.
[12] Suzan Verberne, Lou Boves, and Antal van den Bosch. 2016. Information access
in the art history domain: Evaluating a federated search engine for Rembrandt
research. DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly 10, 4 (2016).
[13] S. Verberne, E. D’Hondt, A. Van Den Bosch, and M. Marx. 2014. Automatic
thematic classification of election manifestos. Information Processing and Management 50, 4 (2014), 554–567. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2014.02.006

RELATED WORKSHOPS

At ECIR 2013, there was a related workshop “Integrating IR technologies for Professional Search” [11]. The workshop aimed to
stimulate exploratory research; to bring together various facets of
IR research and to promote the discussion between researchers towards the development of a generalized framework facilitating the
integration of IR technologies and search tools into next generation
professional search systems. A total of 21 papers were submitted of
which 13 were accepted for presentations during the workshop, including a number of position papers [11]. In addition, the workshop
had Daria Sorokina (LinkedIn) and Nick Belkin (Rutgers University)
as invited speakers.
ECIR 2015 and CHIIR 2017 hosted related workshops on “Supporting Complex Search Tasks” [5]. The workshops did not focus
on professional search tasks only, but also covered complex search
tasks in ‘daily life’ information seeking. The 2017 workshop had two
keynotes: Mark Hall (Edge Hill University, UK) and Jussi Karlgren
(Gavagai, Sweden), the latter presenting the industrial perspective.
The workshop had short paper contributions, presented as posters.
Eleven submissions were received, of which 9 were accepted. The
workshop provided a comprehensive overview of current work on
supporting complex tasks in a variety of settings, and fostered new
collaboration within the field. There was great support for holding
another edition of the workshop at a future conference [5].
The success of these previous workshops, even though not completely on the same topic as this workshop, shows the interests of
the community in the topic of professional search. By bringing this
workshop to SIGIR in 2018 we hope to reach a larger audience of
interested researchers, bringing together people working on many
different facets of professional search and concretely developing a
roadmap of research directions in the following years.

1434

