Short Research Papers I

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Investigating User Perception of Gender Bias in Image Search
The Role of Sexism
Jahna Otterbacher

Alessandro Checco

Open University of Cyprus
jahna.otterbacher@ouc.ac.cy

University of Sheffield
a.checco@sheffield.ac.uk

Gianluca Demartini

Paul Clough

University of Queensland
g.demartini@uq.edu.au

University of Sheffield
p.d.clough@sheffield.ac.uk

ABSTRACT

1

There is growing evidence that search engines produce results that
are socially biased, reinforcing a view of the world that aligns with
prevalent social stereotypes. One means to promote greater transparency of search algorithms - which are typically complex and
proprietary - is to raise user awareness of biased result sets. However, to date, little is known concerning how users perceive bias
in search results, and the degree to which their perceptions differ
and/or might be predicted based on user attributes. One particular
area of search that has recently gained attention, and forms the
focus of this study, is image retrieval and gender bias. We conduct a controlled experiment via crowdsourcing using participants
recruited from three countries to measure the extent to which workers perceive a given image results set to be subjective or objective.
Demographic information about the workers, along with measures
of sexism, are gathered and analysed to investigate whether (gender) biases in the image search results can be detected. Amongst
other findings, the results confirm that sexist people are less likely
to detect and report gender biases in image search results.

Algorithmic processes that are opaque to users (and researchers)
are having increasing influence on users’ access to information. In
the case of search, these processes also influence users’ view of the
information landscape and highly ranked results can shape public
opinion [6, 11]. This is compounded by the trust users show in
the results of search engines; often seen as objective and truthful
[14]. More recently, studies have been undertaken to understand
the impact of users’ beliefs and unconscious biases on their search
interactions and experiences [11, 18]. This paper continues this line
of investigation, focusing on user bias within image search that can
manifest itself through the decisions people make about the items
they select (e.g., perceived quality and relevance), the queries they
pose, etc. In particular, we seek to understand how user biases in
the form of sexism, an area receiving less attention, shape peoples’
views of image search and can reinforce gender stereotypes.

INTRODUCTION

CCS CONCEPTS

Image search engines play a powerful role in shaping peoples’
views of the social world. In a study surrounding professions, Kay
et al. [10] found that Google systematically returned more/fewer
images of stereotype congruent/incongruent people, compared to
labour statistics. Also, when users were shown gender-biased search
results and were asked to estimate the corresponding labour statistic, this skewed their view of the distribution of men/women in a
given profession. The study demonstrated that when search engines
reproduce gender stereotypes, this has the effect of confirming and
exacerbating already prevalent gender stereotypes.
Beyond the direct effect on users’ perceptions, gender-biased
search results increase the retrievability of some images, at the
expense of others [4, 17]. Biased results increase the chances that
stereotype-congruent images will be circulated more widely in society as compared to those that challenge stereotypes. Professionals,
such as marketers or journalists who rely on image search, often in
time-pressured environments [9, 12], may then be more likely to
include stereotypical images in their work.
Recent work has moved beyond the case of gender stereotypes in
image search related to professions, to those surrounding character
traits [13]. Grounded in social psychology theories of person perception, it found that women were more often associated with warm
(e.g., kind emotional) character trait searches whereas men were
more often depicted in searches on agentic traits (e.g., assertive,

2 RELATED WORK
2.1 Gender Bias in Image Search Results

• Information systems → Evaluation of retrieval results; Image search;

KEYWORDS
Gender stereotypes; Search engine bias; User perceptions
ACM Reference Format:
Jahna Otterbacher, Alessandro Checco, Gianluca Demartini, and Paul Clough.
2018. Investigating User Perception of Gender Bias in Image Search: The
Role of Sexism. In SIGIR ’18: The 41st International ACM SIGIR Conference
on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, July 8–12, 2018, Ann
Arbor, MI, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 4 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3209978.3210094

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR ’18, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
© 2018 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5657-2/18/07. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210094

933

Short Research Papers I

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

SIGIR ’18, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
Personal Characteris/cs

Percep/on of Image Set

Country

Query Guess

Age

Query correctly inferred

Gender

Social concepts

Experience

Posi/ve emo/on

Jahna Otterbacher, Alessandro Checco, Gianluca Demartini, and Paul Clough
searches. Some result in image sets that are heavily gender-biased;
while one is a neutral query (“hot air balloon”). As illustrated in
Figure 1, extrapolating from theory, we expect that a user’s level of
sexism will be correlated to the manner in which she/he perceives
the search results, which in turn influences the evaluation of the
results or the degree to which they are seen as objective or biased.
Specifically, we address the following questions:
RQ1: Are sexist/non-sexist people less/more likely to evaluate a
heavily gender-imbalanced result set as being subjective?
RQ2: Is there evidence that sexist/non-sexist people perceive a
given image result set differently?

Evalua/on of Bias

The results
returned are:
1 = Extremely
Subjec/ve
…
7 = Extremely
Objec/ve

Ambivalent Sexism
Benevolent / Hos,le

Figure 1: Conceptual model.

4

intelligent). In contrast to the work to date, which concerned the
measurement of gender bias in search engine results, the present
work aims to gauge the extent to which users actually perceive
gender-based bias, and who (including their characteristics) might
be more/less likely to report subjective results.

2.2

We conduct an experiment on the crowdsourcing platform Crowdflower, where we ask participants a set of questions to assess their
perceived bias of image searches, together with other indicators related to web proficiency and cognitive behavior. We also administer
the ASI, deriving scores for the BS and HS dimensions, as detailed
in [7]. We repeat this experiment for UK, USA, and India.
To assess perceived bias we use a novel technique we call reverse
image search: images are retrieved through a search engine, and
then we ask participants to describe them. We then reveal the actual
query used to retrieve the images and ask the users to compare
this query with the description they provided. In this way, we can
assess perceived bias without priming users on the topic of the
experiment: when users are describing a set of images, they are not
aware that those images have been obtained through a web search,
nor that they will be asked about search engine objectivity. This
allows us to jointly estimate user bias and user perception of bias
for an image search results set. The task is structured as follows:
Part 1 (guess the query): The main part of the task consists of
showing the users a grid of 9 images and asking them what keywords best represent/describe the images. This question is repeated
for multiple grids, each obtained from a different query, as shown
in Table 1. The phrasing of the question is carefully selected to
avoid disclosing the fact that the image grid has been generated
with an image search engine.
Part 2 (search engine opinions): The users are then asked to
answer questions regarding the objectivity of search engines, along
with a number of proficiency self-assessment questions.
Part 3 (perceived bias): Only at this stage in the experiment is
the user told that the grid of images was obtained from a search
engine. For each image grid, the query is disclosed and the user is
required to compare it with the description they provided in Part 1
and assess the objectivity of each image result.
Part 4 (ASI). The user completes the ASI questionnaire to assess
their level of sexism.
The current paper presents analyses concerning the data collected
in Parts 1 and 4 of the experiment.

The Nature of Gender Stereotypes

The Stereotype Content Model [5] holds that we use two key dimensions in our perceptions of others – warmth (i.e., the extent
to which we think someone has pro-social intentions) and competence/agency (i.e., the extent to which we believe someone is
capable of achieving goals). This theory is widely accepted by researchers of person perception [1] and the two dimensions appear
to be culturally universal [2]. These stereotypes describe women as
being high warmth/low competence, and vice versa for men [15].

2.3

Ambivalent Sexism and the ASI

According to a classic definition [3, p. 9] prejudice is an “antipathy
based upon a faulty and inflexible generalization.” Prejudice towards
a particular social group involves holding a stereotypical view
of its members, reducing them to restricted social roles and/or
characteristics. Therefore, sexism can be understood as genderbased prejudice. However, Glick and Fiske [7] pointed out that
sexism differs from other forms of prejudice (e.g., racism) in that it is
not unidimensional, consisting only of antipathy toward the target
group. Rather, sexism is characterized by an ambivalence towards
women: people may be hostile toward women, or they may hold
benevolent attitudes, stereotyping them into limited, traditional
roles. To measure the dimensions of sexism, they developed the
Ambivalent Sexism Inventory (ASI), consisting of 22 items.
The ASI has been shown to reliably tap the two components of
sexism: Hostile Sexism (HS) and Benevolent Sexism (BS). While HS
and BS are positively correlated, HS tends to be associated with
holding negative stereotypes of women, while BS tends to predict
having a positive - although traditional - view of women. In addition,
in a large-scale study, Glick and colleagues [8] demonstrated that
HS and BS are universal across cultures. However, sexism is related
to culture, and national averages on these measures are correlated
to the levels of gender inequality in the society.

3

METHODOLOGY

4.1

Dataset

Queries were chosen based on the findings of [13]. In addition to
those listed in Table 1, the full dataset includes neutral character
traits, as well as queries that result in non-biased image sets1 .

RESEARCH QUESTIONS

We use the ASI as a tool for understanding how users of image
search engines may perceive gender bias. We present study participants with images returned by Google in response to character trait

1 The

full anonymized dataset, containing 2.811 query-description comparisons for
281 different users equally split across the three regions and 10 unique queries, as well

934

Short Research Papers I

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Investigating User Perception of Gender Bias - The Role of Sexism

Query

smart
person

aggressive
person

warm
person

anxious
person

SIGIR ’18, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

hot air
balloon

Trait

+

-

+

-

=

Bias

M

M

F

F

na

“warm person,” which primarily features images of men/women
respectively, as being biased. This result is in line with the theory,
which predicts that benevolent sexists hold positive, yet traditional
views of women. Thus, they would arguably not be surprised to find
images of men depicting a smart person (agentic trait) and women
depicting a warm person (warm trait).
Interestingly, sexism is not correlated to participants’ evaluations
of the images retrieved on the queries “aggressive” or “anxious
person.” In particular, we might have expected to see the Hostile
dimension of sexism playing a role in the case of “anxious person.”
This negative character trait retrieves primarily images of women,
and hostile sexists tend to hold negative views of women.

Table 1: Query used with corresponding trait (+ for positive,
- for negative) and bias (M/F for bias towards males/females).

For our initial analysis, we focus on users’ perceptions of bias in
the neutral query “hot air balloon”, as well as in four gender-biased
queries detailed in Table 1. The theory of ambivalent sexism makes
predictions on the correlation between BS and HS, and holding
positive/negative views of women; thus we focus on positive/negative traits. Finally, we eliminate one observation, in which the
participant did not disclose his or her gender.

5

5.2

RESULTS AND ANALYSIS

We confirm the validity of the ASI scores, conducting an exploratory
factor analysis with varimax rotation to examine the structure of
participants’ responses. The analysis revealed a two-factor solution, corresponding to the two dimensions of Ambivalent Sexism
- HS and BS. The solution explained 40% of the variance and had
structural coefficients (i.e., loadings) of at least 0.44 for both factors.
An acceptable degree of internal consistency was found; the factor corresponding to HS had a Cronbach alpha of 0.76, while the
second factor corresponding to BS had an alpha of 0.74. ANOVA
revealed regional (BS: F = 117.5∗∗∗ , HS: F = 102.4∗∗∗ ) and gender
(BS: F = 216.7∗∗∗ , HS: F = 135.3∗∗∗ ) differences on both dimensions
of the ASI2 . Generally, men scored higher than women on both
BS and HS. Participants from India scored higher on BS and HS as
compared to those from the USA, who in turn, scored higher on
both dimensions as compared to participants from the UK.

5.1

Do Sexists Perceive Results Differently?

Having observed that sexism is correlated to judgments on the
“smart” and “warm” image sets, we now examine these queries in
detail. We test the conceptual model detailed in Figure 1, addressing
RQ2. As depicted in the figure, we incorporate a mediating variable
that attempts to capture how the participant perceives the images
returned. To this end, we analyzed the query guess provided in
Part 1 of the experiment. We processed the query guess using
the Linguistic Inquiry and Wordcount tool [16]. Using a custom
dictionary, we evaluated the extent to which the guess matched
the true query. We also evaluated the extent to which the guess
incorporated “social” words (including family relations and genderrelated words) and “positive emotion” words.
For each query, we generated a structural equation model (SEM)
using R’s Lavaan package3 . As shown in Table 3, the model incorporates the estimation of two latent constructs (user characteristics,
perception of the images), which are not measured directly but result from multiple other measures, one directly measured construct
(evaluation of objectivity), as well as the relationships between
the constructs (i.e., the structural model). The measurement model
corresponds to the smaller lower boxes in Figure 1 (e.g., Country),
and the structural model to the upper boxes (e.g., Personal Characteristics). The left side of Table 3 depicts the model for the “smart
person” query, which has a Comparative Fit Index of 0.98 and an
RMSEA of 0.05. The SEM that describes participants’ perceptions of
and reactions to the “warm person” image results is also presented
in Table 3, on the right side. The model has a Comparative Fit Index
of 0.94 and a RMSEA of 0.07. In both cases, Table 3 reports the
estimated coefficient for each variable in the SEM, along with its
z-score and statistical significance. For both queries, we observe
a positive correlation between the latent variable comprising the
participant characteristics (gender and ASI dimensions) and the
manner in which she/he perceived the set of images retrieved. In
fact, further analysis (not reported) reveals that participants who
correctly guessed the queries had a higher mean score on both the
benevolent (warm: t =2.354∗ , smart: t =3.047∗∗ ) and hostile (warm:
t =2.984∗∗ , smart: t =4.018∗∗ ) dimensions of the ASI, in comparison to those who did not correctly guess the query. We observe
a negative correlation between the latent variable comprising the
perception measures and the evaluation measure (i.e., perception of
bias / non-objective). The observed correlations, while statistically
significant, are rather weak. In future work, we plan to incorporate

Is Sexism Correlated to Evaluating Results?

We now examine whether or not sexism has a direct correlation
to how participants evaluate the objectivity of image result sets,
which are known to be gender-biased. Table 2 details, for each
query, a logistic regression model in which we predict the event
that a participant evaluates the image set as not being objective (i.e.,
a rating of 1, 2, 3 or 4), based only on demographic characteristics,
including the two ASI dimensions. Table 2 details the estimated
coefficients (when statistically significant) along with a measure of
fit, McFadden’s R2 , which ranges from 0 to 1.
On the neutral query, “hot air balloon,” only 28 of 280 participants
indicated that the retrieved images were not objective. As expected,
no participant characteristics were correlated to this outcome. In
contrast, for the two image sets based on character traits with
positive valance (“smart” and “warm”), we observe that, even when
we control for country of residence, age, gender and self-reported
experience, that the Benevolent dimension of sexism is negatively
correlated to having evaluated these image sets as not objective.
In other words, benevolent sexists are less likely than others to
evaluate a set of images retrieved on the query “smart person” or
as a full description of each data field, is available at github.com/AlessandroChecco/
gender_bias.
2 We use the following conventions: ∗∗∗ p < .001, ∗∗ p < .01, ∗ p < .05

3 http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/lavaan/lavaan.pdf

935

Short Research Papers I

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

SIGIR ’18, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
Query

Jahna Otterbacher, Alessandro Checco, Gianluca Demartini, and Paul Clough
Benevolent

Hostile

Pseudo R2

# Non-objective

Country

Age

Gender

log(Experience)

Hot air balloon

28

n.s.

n.s.

n.s.

n.s.

n.s.

n.s.

0.05

Smart person

70

n.s.

n.s.

n.s.

n.s.

-0.773∗∗

n.s.

0.17

Aggressive person

59

n.s.

n.s.

n.s.

n.s.

n.s.

n.s.

0.06

Warm person

92

n.s.

n.s.

-0.690∗

-0.247∗

-0.510∗

n.s.

0.13

Anxious person

60

n.s.

n.s.

n.s.

n.s.

n.s.

n.s.

0.04

Table 2: Logistic regression models to predict instances where image result set is evaluated as not objective.

REFERENCES

Measurement Model
Smart
Est.

Warm

z

z

Est.

→User characteristics
Male

1.00

fixed

1.00

fixed

Benevolent

3.805

4.420∗∗

3.629

4.492∗∗

Hostile

4.878

4.203∗∗

5.219

3.849∗∗

→Perception
Guess match

1.00

fixed

1.00

fixed

Social

0.850

7.428∗∗

0.815

3.284∗

Positive

0.527

5.490∗∗

0.275

2.646∗

1.00

fixed

1.00

fixed

→Evaluation
Objectivity rating

Structural Model
User→Perception
Perception→Evaluation

0.013

2.628∗∗

0.009

2.155∗

-0.025

-2.535∗

-0.028

-2.677∗∗

Table 3: Structural Equation Models.

more of the information collected during our experiment, into the
model, to improve its predictive power. However, the evidence generally supports the conceptual model put forward in Figure 1. In
line with what the theory predicts, users of search engines who
are more sexist, perceive image results differently than non-sexist
people, and are less likely to perceive gender-biased results sets.
Furthermore, it is the benevolent component of sexism that appears
to be the most important.

6

CONCLUSIONS

Increasingly, attention is being paid to identifying and highlighting
sources of bias within search engines. In this paper we investigate
the impact of personal traits on identifying gender-biased image
search results. Understanding prejudices and beliefs is critical in
better understanding how people engage with and evaluate search
technologies and may influence future design. Our findings confirm
that people who are rated as more sexist according to the Ambivalent Sexism Inventory measure are less likely to recognize gender
biases in image search, thereby reinforcing social stereotypes.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This project is supported by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement Nos. 739578
and 732328.

936

[1] Andrea E Abele and Susanne Bruckmüller. 2011. The bigger one of the “Big
Two”? Preferential processing of communal information. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology 47, 5 (2011), 935–948.
[2] Andrea E Abele, Mirjam Uchronski, Caterina Suitner, and Bogdan Wojciszke.
2008. Towards an operationalization of the fundamental dimensions of agency
and communion: Trait content ratings in five countries considering valence and
frequency of word occurrence. European Journal of Social Psychology 38, 7 (2008),
1202–1217.
[3] Gordon W Allport. 1954. The nature of prejudice. (1954).
[4] Leif Azzopardi and Vishwa Vinay. 2008. Retrievability: an evaluation measure for
higher order information access tasks. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference
on Information and knowledge management. ACM, 561–570.
[5] Amy JC Cuddy, Susan T Fiske, and Peter Glick. 2008. Warmth and competence
as universal dimensions of social perception: The stereotype content model and
the BIAS map. Advances in experimental social psychology 40 (2008), 61–149.
[6] Robert Epstein and Ronald E. Robertson. 2015. The search engine manipulation
effect (SEME) and its possible impact on the outcomes of elections. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 112, 33 (2015), E4512–E4521.
[7] Peter Glick and Susan T Fiske. 1996. The ambivalent sexism inventory: Differentiating hostile and benevolent sexism. Journal of personality and social psychology
70, 3 (1996), 491.
[8] Peter Glick, Susan T Fiske, Antonio Mladinic, José L Saiz, Dominic Abrams,
Barbara Masser, Bolanle Adetoun, Johnstone E Osagie, Adebowale Akande, Amos
Alao, et al. 2000. Beyond prejudice as simple antipathy: hostile and benevolent
sexism across cultures. Journal of personality and social psychology 79, 5 (2000),
763.
[9] Ayse Göker, Richard Butterworth, Andrew MacFarlane, Tanya S Ahmed, and
Simone Stumpf. 2016. Expeditions through image jungles: the commercial use of
image libraries in an online environment. Journal of Documentation 72, 1 (2016),
5–23.
[10] Matthew Kay, Cynthia Matuszek, and Sean A Munson. 2015. Unequal representation and gender stereotypes in image search results for occupations. In
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. ACM, 3819–3828.
[11] Juhi Kulshrestha, Motahhare Eslami, Johnnatan Messias, Muhammad Bilal Zafar,
Saptarshi Ghosh, Krishna P. Gummadi, and Karrie Karahalios. 2017. Quantifying
Search Bias: Investigating Sources of Bias for Political Searches in Social Media.
In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative
Work and Social Computing (CSCW ’17). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 417–432.
[12] Lori McCay-Peet and Elaine Toms. 2009. Image use within the work task model:
Images as information and illustration. Journal of the Association for Information
Science and Technology 60, 12 (2009), 2416–2429.
[13] Jahna Otterbacher, Jo Bates, and Paul Clough. 2017. Competent Men and Warm
Women: Gender Stereotypes and Backlash in Image Search Results. In Proceedings
of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’17).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 6620–6631. https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025727
[14] Bing Pan, Helene Hembrooke, Thorsten Joachims, Lori Lorigo, Geri Gay, and
Laura Granka. 2007. In Google We Trust: Users’ Decisions on Rank, Position, and
Relevance. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 12, 3 (2007), 801–823.
[15] Laurie A Rudman and Peter Glick. 2001. Prescriptive gender stereotypes and
backlash toward agentic women. Journal of social issues 57, 4 (2001), 743–762.
[16] Yla R Tausczik and James W Pennebaker. 2010. The psychological meaning of
words: LIWC and computerized text analysis methods. Journal of language and
social psychology 29, 1 (2010), 24–54.
[17] Myriam C Traub, Thaer Samar, Jacco Van Ossenbruggen, Jiyin He, Arjen de Vries,
and Lynda Hardman. 2016. Querylog-based assessment of retrievability bias
in a large newspaper corpus. In Proceedings of the 16th ACM/IEEE-CS on Joint
Conference on Digital Libraries. ACM, 7–16.
[18] Ryen White. 2013. Beliefs and Biases in Web Search. In Proceedings of the 36th
International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval (SIGIR ’13). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 3–12.

