SIRIP: Industry Days

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Extracting Real-Time Insights from Graphs and Social Streams
Charu C. Aggarwal
IBM Research AI
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY
charu@us.ibm.com

ABSTRACT

such as text tweets, images, or other social media objects. The result is a social stream.
Dynamic graph and social streams can be mined for a wealth
of insights. Examples of applications include clustering, classification, link prediction, event detection, and anomaly detection. In
many cases, these applications can be enabled without any content information beyond the stream of edges that is received over
time. However, if content information is available, the quality of
the results is greatly enhanced.
A broad principle pervades the algorithmic design of these streamcentric solutions. In many cases, the key to success is the creation
of a summary data structure from the stream of edges. To be useful,
this summary structure must obey the following properties:
• The summary structure should be easy to update with time
in online fashion. This property ensures that it can be maintained in streaming fashion.
• The summary structure should retain enough information
about the stream, so that one can extract the relevant insights in real-time.
• In some applications, the data might evolve, and therefore
the old data becomes stale and useless for mining. In such
cases, some tricks for memory-less, decay-based updates are
effective.
Clearly, the design of the summary structure will vary with the application at hand. For example, a summary structure that is useful
for classification might not be very useful for indexing. It is important to ensure the compactness of the summary structure; such
an approach directly helps economy of storage and also indirectly
reduces computational requirements.
We discuss a wide variety of summary structures used in graph
streaming applications, and the specific processing techniques constructed on top of them. Examples of such summary structures include sketches, min-wise hashes, reservoir samples, clusters, and
spectral statistics. These different choices lead to different types of
insights. In some cases, multiple summary structures need to be
combined in order to enable the application at hand.
When content-centric information is available in addition to
edges, challenges arise as to how one might use the content in
addition to the structure. We show that the use of content is often beneficial in improving the quality of the extracted insights by
providing complementary information. We provide specific examples of cases (such as event detection) in which content helps the
mining process.

Many streaming applications in social networks, communication
networks, and information networks are built on top of large graphs
Such large networks contain continuously occurring processes,
which lead to streams of edge interactions and posts. For example, the messages sent by participants on Facebook to one another
can be viewed as content-rich interactions along edges. Such edgecentric streams are referred to as graph streams or social streams.
The aggregate volume of these interactions can scale up superlinearly with the number of nodes in the network, which makes the
problem more pressing for rapidly growing networks. These continuous streams may be mined for useful insights. In these cases,
real-time analysis is crucial because of the time-sensitive nature of
the interactions. However, generalizing conventional mining applications to such graphs turns out to be a challenge because of the
expensive nature of graph mining algorithms. We discuss recent
advances in several graph mining applications like clustering, classification, link prediction, event detection, and anomaly detection
in real-time graph streams.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems → Information retrieval;

KEYWORDS
Graph streams; Social streams
ACM Reference Format:
Charu C. Aggarwal. 2018. Extracting Real-Time Insights from Graphs and
Social Streams. In SIGIR’18: The 41st International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval,
July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1 page.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210212

1 OVERVIEW
The power of social media has made dynamic and streaming graphs
increasingly popular in real-world applications [1]. In many of these
settings, the interactions take place over a graph infrastructure, in
which nodes correspond to individuals, and edges correspond to
interactions. The result is a graph stream [1]. Such graph streams
can sometimes also be associated with different types of content,
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
© 2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5657-2/18/07. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210212

REFERENCES
[1] Charu C. Aggarwal and Karthik Subbian. 2014. Evolutionary network analysis:
A Survey ACM Computing Surveys 47, 1 (April 2014),

1339

