Keynote

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Data Science for Social Good and Public Policy:
Examples, Opportunities, and Challenges
Rayid Ghani

University of Chicago
Chicago, Illinois
rayidghani@gmail.com

ABSTRACT

BIO

Can data science help reduce police violence and misconduct? Can
it help increase retention of patients in care? Can it help prevent
children from getting lead poisoning? Can it help cities better target
limited resources to improve lives of citizens? We’re all aware of
the hype around data science and related buzzwords right now but
turning this hype into social impact takes cross-disciplinary training, teams, and methods. In this talk, I’ll discuss lessons learned
from our work at University of Chicago while working on dozens of
data science projects over the past few years with non-profits and
governments on high-impact public policy and social challenges
in criminal justice, public health, education, economic development, public safety, workforce training, and urban infrastructure.
I’ll highlight opportunities for IR researchers to get involved in
these efforts as well as information retrieval challenges that are
open research problems that need to be solved in order to increase
the effectiveness of today’s machine learning and data science algorithms in order to have social and policy impact in a fair and
equitable manner.

Rayid Ghani is the Director of the Center for Data Science & Public
Policy and a Senior Fellow at the Harris School of Public Policy and
the Computation Institute at the University of Chicago. Rayid is a reformed computer scientist and wanna-be social scientist, but mostly
just wants to increase the use of large-scale AI/ML/DS/data-related
buzzword approaches in solving large public policy and social challenges. Among other areas, Rayid works with governments and
non-profits in policy areas such as health, criminal justice, education, public safety, economic development, and urban infrastructure.
Rayid is also passionate about teaching practical data science and
started the Data Science for Social Good Fellowship at UChicago
that trains computer scientists, statisticians, and social scientists
from around the world to work on data science problems with social
impact.
Before joining the University of Chicago, Rayid was the Chief
Scientist of the Obama 2012 Election Campaign where he focused
on data, analytics, and technology to target and influence voters,
donors, and volunteers. Previously, Rayid was a Research Scientist
and led the Machine Learning group at Accenture Labs. Rayid did
his graduate work in Machine Learning at Carnegie Mellon University and is actively involved in organizing Data Science related
conferences and workshops. In his ample free time, Rayid works
with non-profits to help them with their data, analytics and digital
efforts and strategy.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Computing methodologies → Artificial intelligence; Machine
learning approaches;

KEYWORDS
Data Science, Equitable Computing
ACM Reference Format:
Rayid Ghani. 2018. Data Science for Social Good and Public Policy: Examples,
Opportunities, and Challenges. In SIGIR ’18: The 41st International ACM
SIGIR Conference on Research Development in Information Retrieval, July
8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1 page. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210231

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’18, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
© 2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5657-2/18/07.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210231

3

