Short Research Papers II

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

A Taxonomy of Queries for E-commerce Search
Parikshit Sondhi*

Mohit Sharma*

WalmartLabs
Sunnyvale, CA, USA
parikshit@neulogic.ai

WalmartLabs
Sunnyvale, CA, USA
mohit.sharma@walmartlabs.com

Pranam Kolari

ChengXiang Zhai

WalmartLabs
Sunnyvale, CA, USA
pkolari@walmartlabs.com

University of Illinois Urbana Champaign
Urbana, IL, USA
czhai@illinois.edu

ABSTRACT

ACM Reference Format:
Parikshit Sondhi*, Mohit Sharma*, Pranam Kolari, and ChengXiang Zhai.
2018. A Taxonomy of Queries for E-commerce Search. In SIGIR ’18: The
41st International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research & Development in
Information Retrieval, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 4 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210152

Understanding the search tasks and search behavior of users is
necessary for optimizing search engine results. While much work
has been done on understanding the users in Web search, little
knowledge is available about the search tasks and behavior of users
in the E-Commerce (E-Com) search applications. In this paper, we
share the first empirical study of the queries and search behavior of
users in E-Com search by analyzing search log from a major E-Com
search engine. The analysis results show that E-Com queries can be
categorized into five categories, each with distinctive search behaviors: (1) Shallow Exploration Queries are short vague queries that a
user may use initially in exploring the product space. (2) Targeted
Purchase Queries are queries used by users to purchase items that
they are generally familiar with, thus without much decision making. (3) Major-Item Shopping Queries are used by users to shop for
a major item which is often relatively expensive and thus requires
some serious exploration, but typically in a limited scope of choices.
(4) Minor-Item Shopping Queries are used by users to shop for
minor items that are generally not very expensive, but still require
some exploration of choices. (5) Hard-Choice Shopping Queries are
used by users who want to deeply explore all the candidate products before finalizing the choice often appropriate when multiple
products must be carefully compared with each other. These five
categories form a taxonomy for E-Com queries and can shed light
on how we may develop customized search technologies for each
type of search queries to improve search engine utility.

1

INTRODUCTION

Understanding the search tasks and search behavior of users is
necessary for optimizing search engine results; this is especially
important if the search engine is to personalize the search results
for each individual user [4]. For example, the Web query taxonomy
suggested by Broder [1], which classifies Web queries into three
categories (i.e., informational, navigational, and transactional), has
revealed important differences between Web search tasks and traditional library search tasks. Thus enabling researchers to realize
that traditional retrieval models were limited to serving informational queries, and helping open up new directions in information
retrieval research.
Although much work has been done on understanding users in
Web search [1, 5], little knowledge is available about the search
tasks and user behavior in the E-Com search applications, despite
their increasing importance [3]. To bridge this knowledge gap, we
conduct the first empirical study of E-Com search queries, focused
on formulating a taxonomy that distinguishes the various types of
E-Com search tasks. Our goal is to analyze a large scale commercial
E-Com search engine 1 log, in an attempt to discover user behavior
patterns that represent distinct search tasks, and naturally lead to
a coherent query taxonomy. Considering the significant impact
of Broder’s work [1], we believe that a meaningful taxonomy of
E-Com queries would also help develop a better understanding of ECom related information retrieval problems, and stimulate research
on novel technologies, especially related to comprehensive search
task support.
One approach to constructing an E-Com query taxonomy, is to
organize the queries in the same product category hierarchy, that is
used for organizing E-com catalogs (e.g. Home, Electronics, Apparel
etc.). However such an organization provides limited value, as it
is “imposed" based on subjective decisions of human curators, not
reflective of underlying E-com search tasks. In fact our analysis
reveals that: 1) queries exhibiting similar user behavior patterns are
often associated with multiple product-categories, and 2) a single
product category may be associated with queries exhibiting diverse
user behavior patterns.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems → Query log analysis; • Applied computing → Online shopping;

KEYWORDS
E-com search, query taxonomy, search log analysis
∗ First two authors contributed equally. Work was done when Parikshit was at
WalmartLabs

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR ’18, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
© 2018 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5657-2/18/07. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210152

1 http:/www.walmart.com

1245

Short Research Papers II

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

SIGIR ’18, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

P. Sondhi et al.
(iv) Tokens: number of tokens in the query.
(v) Browsed pages: average number of pages that are browsed for
the query.
(vi) Revenue: revenue attributed to the search query in a week.
(vii) Clicked items: number of items clicked for the search query
on the results page.

Our goal instead is to “discover" a natural clustering of queries,
such that each cluster represents a distinct E-com search task. To
this end, we first define a query representation using 15 user behavior features obtained from our search log. Next, we propose
a cluster stability metric, for tuning suitable clustering algorithm
hyper-parameters, leading to “stable" query clusters across different
temporally randomly sampled data-sets. Our analysis shows that
query clusters generated in this manner naturally map to various Ecom search tasks. We ultimately obtain 5 temporally stable clusters.
Specifically, they correspond to the following five categories of the
E-Com query taxonomy: (1) Shallow Exploration Queries are short
vague queries that a user may use initially in exploring the product
space. (2) Targeted Purchase Queries are queries used by users to
purchase items that they are generally familiar with, thus without
much decision making. (3) Major-Item Shopping Queries are used
by users to shop for items which are often relatively expensive and
thus requires involved exploration, but typically in a limited scope
of choices. (4) Minor-Item Shopping Queries are used by users to
shop for minor items that are generally not very expensive, but
still require some exploration of choices. (5) Hard-Choice Shopping
Queries are used by users who want to deeply explore all the candidate products before finalizing the choice, often appropriate when
product constraints are hard to express and multiple products must
be carefully evaluated. This taxonomy can be used to infer a user’s
intent or task and thus enables a search engine to customize its
search algorithm toward the specific needs of a particular user.

2

2.2

(i) Browsed pages: average number of pages that are browsed in
a session having the target query.
(ii) Co-occuring queries: average number of distinct queries that
co-occur with the target query in a session.
(iii) Clicked items: number of items clicked in a session having the
target query.
Note that we did not use any content based features, since such
a representation would result in clusters that group queries with
similar words, but not necessarily similar user behavior.

3

METHOD

We used the k-Means clustering algorithm [2] for generating the
clusters. A key technical challenge is to determine the suitable value
of k, such that it results in meaningful query clusters. To solve this
challenge, we propose a metric to measure the stability of a cluster
across all the months under consideration.
Specifically, let t denote the month in which the data was collected, i the cluster index, and c(i, t, k) the cluster center of ith
cluster for month t generated using a particular value of k, where
i ≤ k. Cluster indices were assigned in descending order of their
size, i.e. the largest cluster in any clustering was assigned the index
1, while the smallest was assigned index k. Such an assignment is
appropriate since we would not expect relative cluster sizes associated with distinct query categories to vary dramatically across
different clusterings.
We first applied k-Means clustering for the data collected in each
month for different values of hyper-parameter k, and then evaluated
the different clusterings associated with each k using our Cluster
Stability Metric (Sk ) that measures the goodness of clustering as
average of dik for all values of i for a particular k, as shown below:

DATASET

We collected data for our experiments from search logs of a major
E-Com search engine. In order to create this dataset, we randomly
sub-sampled users’ search sessions from the logs for a week in each
month from March, 2017 to November, 2017. For the purpose of this
analysis, we restricted to the sessions where a user issued at-least
two queries and clicked on at-least one product. Also, to eliminate
anomalous sessions resulting from scrapers, we ignored sessions
where the number of clicks was more than 100. After pre-processing,
we ultimately collected 3 Million unique queries spanning over 9
months of user search sessions from March 2017 to Novemeber
2017.
For each query, we then constructed features using the following
query and session level properties.

2.1

Session-specific properties

These properties are computed after considering all the queries
issued in a session. The session-specific properties used in this
work are as follow:

Query-specific properties

This group comprises of properties that are solely computed based
on a query and a user’s interaction with the query. The queryspecific properties used in this work are as follow:
(i) Impressions or imp(q): number of times query q was issued in
a week sampled from a particular month.
(ii) Clicks(q), atc(q), order(q): total number of clicks, add-to-carts
and orders received for query q in a week.
(iii) Click rates, add-to-cart ratio and order ratio are computed as
follows:
clicks(q)
ctr (q) =
,
imp(q)
atc(q)
atcr (q) =
,
clicks(q)
order (q)
.
ordr (q) =
atc(q)

Sk =

dik =

Õ
2
|T |(|T | − 1)

k
1Õ
d .
k i=1 ik

Õ

tp ∈T tq ∈T ,tp ,tq

(1)

||c(i, tp , k) − c(i, tq , k)||2 , (2)

where (dik ) is the average pairwise distance between the ith clusters
for different values of t, T represents the set of all the months under
consideration, tp denotes month p and tq represents month q.
Our underlying assumption is that query clusters representing
prominent search tasks (or query categories) are likely to be stable
over different ts. Thus in a good clustering scheme, all clusters
would be stable, and we would expect the value of Sk to be low.

1246

Short Research Papers II

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

A Taxonomy of Queries for E-commerce Search

SIGIR ’18, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Table 1: Cluster Stability Metric (Sk ) for different values of k
k
4
5
7
9
10

pages, along with convenient tools for users to compare various
candidate products.

Sk
1504.401
895.305
4781.696
3424.999
1227.422

4.2.3 Targeted Purchase Queries. This cluster is distinguished
by its very high click, add-to-cart and conversion metrics. It is dominated by grocery queries associated with inexpensive products that
don’t require deep decision making. These are also products that
users typically purchase repeatedly. While the search engine catalog may contain several relevant products for these queries, users
typically may not have a strong preference of one over the other
and are not willing to spend too much time making comparisons
and deciding. This intuition is further strengthened by the lowest
normalized query pagination score (1.000) as shown in Table 3.
Most search engines use user engagement and product popularity
as a strong ranking signals. Consequently, queries in this cluster are
most likely to suffer from cold-start problem, where new relevant
products are never exposed to the users and users don’t care to
paginate sufficiently to discover them. For such queries, either
the search engine must incorporate explore-exploit techniques to
introduce a churn in the returned results, or only a small product
inventory needs to be maintained.

4 RESULTS
4.1 Stable cluster discovery
We applied standard scaling to the query attributes prior to applying
the k-Means over the queries. Table 1 shows the values of Sk for
different values of k over the collected data. As can be seen from
the table, for k = 5 we achieve the lowest value of Sk and this is
expected as there may not exist a large number of significantly
different patterns in eCommerce search. It is interesting to note
that the value of Sk decreases for higher values of k (k > 7) but
nevertheless remains significantly higher than k = 5. Next, we will
analyze the clusters discovered for the month of March, 2017 to
derive insights about the queries present in those clusters.

4.2

4.2.4 Minor-Item Shopping Queries. This cluster is dominated
by queries for inexpensive durable items associated with the Kitchen
/ Bathroom Appliance and Home Decor categories. These queries
have moderate click, add-to-cart, and order metrics. They also have
slightly higher pagination metric. A review of queries suggests that
users typically do care about certain stylistic/aesthetic aspects of
these products, and therefore explore more products and spend
more time in making decision compared to Targeted Purchase
Queries.

Stable cluster analysis

Table 3 shows the mean and the standard deviation of size and
centroids of the clusters across different months in 2017 for k = 5.
We will also briefly discuss appropriate search strategies that can
be applied to each cluster whenever possible.
4.2.1 Shallow Exploration Queries . This cluster comprises short
and broad queries as evidenced by the average token length of
2.9 (Table 3) and its top queries (Table 2). We also observe the
lowest click, add-to-cart, and order metrics. A review of queries
suggests shoppers use these queries to start their exploration and
get inspiration for re-formulating more precise queries after looking
at the results. This intuition is further reinforced by the lack of
deep pagination for these queries. The users when submitting these
queries, are merely browsing the top few products without clicking
or paginating. Finally queries in this cluster are associated with
a diverse set of product categories, e.g., Electronics, Home Decor,
Beauty, Toys, Pets, etc. However, we only observe limited queries
from Grocery and Apparel segments, which are more prominent in
Targeted Purchase and Hard-Choice Shopping clusters.
Due to their inherent ambiguity, to improve user experience for
these queries, the E-com system, must return a diverse enough
collection of products and navigation options, so the user can easily
understand the exploration space involved, and follow appropriate
navigation links or formulate suitable queries.

4.2.5 Hard-Choice Shopping Queries. This cluster is dominated
by Apparel, Accessories and Home decor related queries where: 1)
a user typically has hundreds of relevant products to choose from,
2) users care significantly about the product being purchased and
are willing to spend time in exploring, and 3) it is hard to express
exact user requirements or particularly expected style attributes
through keyword queries or filters. Thus users end up paginating
deep into search results to find suitable products, as evidenced by
the high browsed pages/query value (5.248) shown in Table 3.
These queries would benefit from user interfaces that allow users
to easily navigate a large product space, review several products,
while giving them the ability to keep track of products they found
interesting (for example via favorite lists). These queries would also
benefit the most from abilities that allow users to express information needs that are not easy to express via keywords (example
search by image, show similar products etc.).
4.2.6 Overall Taxonomy. The five categories of queries form
a meaningful taxonomy for classifying queries in E-Com search
as illustrated in Figure 1, where we show the following decision
process: if a user knows well about what items to buy, the query
would likely fall into "Targeted Purchase." If a user doesn’t know
well, then the user would have to explore. In such a case, if the user
cannot even specify a specific query, the query would be very short
and fall into "Shallow Exploration." Otherwise, we may further distinguish a case where the relevance criteria are hard to specify and
careful comparison between alternative choices must be made, i.e.,
“Hard-choice shopping" where the user often has to explore deeply

4.2.2 Major-Item Shopping Queries. This cluster comprises of
queries with highest click rates, but comparatively much lower add
to cart and order metrics. A look at the queries suggests that queries
are dominated by expensive product categories like electronics and
furniture. Users typically don’t paginate too deep for such queries,
suggesting limited choices, but do need time and detailed product
information to make a purchase decision.
Beyond ensuring search quality (i.e. relevance of results), improving user satisfaction metrics for these queries would require
detailed information on individual items to be provided on product

1247

Short Research Papers II

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

SIGIR ’18, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

P. Sondhi et al.
Table 2: Top queries for each cluster

Shallow Exploration
tires
lamps
bike
ipad
easter
storage
apple watch
lego
storage bins
phones
makeup
shampoo
dog food
candy
water

Major-Item Shopping
nintendo switch
tv stand
curtains
laptop
desk
bikes
microwave
nintendo switch console
dresser
patio furniture
mattress
tablets
futon
vacuum
tv stands

Targeted Purchase
toilet paper
paper towels
baby wipes
toothpaste
laundry detergent
easter candy
paper plates
wipes
cat litter
peanut butter
cereal
body wash
sugar
deodorant
womens socks

Minor-Item Shopping
toothbrush holder
dish towels
broom and dust pan
kitchen utensils
knife set
spatula
cooking utensils
oven mitts
accent pillows set of 4
utensil holder
pot holders
spices
salt and pepper shaker set
plunger
pizza pan

Hard-Choice Shopping
tv
pioneer woman
bedding comforter set
women shoes
decorative pillows
pioneer woman clearance
iphone 6s plus case
toddler girl clothes
engagement rings
wedding rings
outdoor pillows
funko pop
comforter set
iphone se case
womens sandals

Table 3: Size and centroids of the clusters found in different months in 2017.
Type
Shallow Exploration
Major-Item Shopping
Targeted Purchase
Minor-Item Shopping
Hard-Choice Shopping
*

Size*
15.323 ± 3.444
10.512 ± 0.934
4.319 ± 0.680
3.079 ± 0.097
1.000 ± 0.289

Click rate*
1.000 ± 0.000
3.509 ± 0.018
3.352 ± 0.000
1.843 ± 0.000
1.490 ± 0.000

Add-to-cart ratio*
1.0 ± 0.000
4.865 ± 0.000
12.000 ± 0.001
3.500 ± 0.000
3.481 ± 0.000

Order ratio*
1.000 ± 0.000
2.800 ± 0.000
25.900 ± 0.000
2.433 ± 0.000
2.733 ± 0.000

Tokens
2.903 ± 0.006
3.476 ± 0.006
3.460 ± 0.012
3.258 ± 0.004
3.536 ± 0.000

Browsed pages/query*
1.107 ± 0.001
1.092 ± 0.000
1.000 ± 0.000
1.209 ± 0.001
5.248 ± 0.060

The values in the column are normalized by dividing them by the lowest value in the column.

by viewing more result pages due to the difficulty in completely
specifying the relevance criteria, and also add more products to the
cart for a thorough comparison. In the remaining cases, the user
would be able to specify relevance criteria, and thus would not need
to explore deeply, though the user would still have to explore alternative choices before finalizing a purchasing decision, and here we
can further distinguish “Major-item shopping" from “Minor-item
shopping. In the former situation, the relevance of search results
is likely high (due to the fact that there aren’t many choices), so
clickthrough rates are high; in contrast, in the latter situation, the
relevance may not necessarily be high due to too many choices,
thus the clickthrough rate tends to be lower.

Shopping, Major-Item Shopping and Minor-Item Shopping. They
not only allow us to better understand users of E-Com search engines, but also provide a basis for optimizing E-Com search results
via personalization and adaptive search task support, on which we
have also offered some preliminary thoughts.
Our proposed taxonomy also has interesting parallels with traditional consumer product categories found in economics literature.
For example, our Targeted query category aligns well with the
notion of convenience products2 , which are generally low priced
consumable products that customers buy frequently without investing too much decision making effort. On the other hand, our
Hard-Choice category represents queries often used to look for
products in the heterogenous shopping product 3 category, where
every product is fundamentally different from the others, and users’
spend considerable time making decisions.

REFERENCES
[1] Andrei Broder. 2002. A Taxonomy of Web Search. SIGIR Forum 36, 2 (Sept. 2002),
3–10. https://doi.org/10.1145/792550.792552
[2] Tapas Kanungo, David M Mount, Nathan S Netanyahu, Christine D Piatko, Ruth
Silverman, and Angela Y Wu. 2002. An efficient k-means clustering algorithm:
Analysis and implementation. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine
intelligence 24, 7 (2002), 881–892.
[3] Shubhra Kanti Karmaker Santu, Parikshit Sondhi, and ChengXiang Zhai. 2017.
On Application of Learning to Rank for E-Commerce Search. In Proceedings of
the 40th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’17). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 475–484. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3077136.3080838
[4] Jaime Teevan, Susan T. Dumais, and Eric Horvitz. 2010. Potential for Personalization. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact. 17, 1, Article 4 (April 2010), 31 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1721831.1721835
[5] Ryen W. White and Steven M. Drucker. 2007. Investigating Behavioral Variability
in Web Search. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on World Wide
Web (WWW ’07). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 21–30. https://doi.org/10.1145/
1242572.1242576

Figure 1: Illustration of Taxonomy of E-Com Queries

5

DISCUSSION

We conducted an empirical analysis of an E-Com search log data
set and derived a taxonomy for E-Com queries which includes five
categories: Shallow Exploration, Targeted Purchase, Hard-Choice

2 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Final_good#Convenience_goods
3 https://www.marketing91.com/shopping-products/

1248

