Doctoral Consortium

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Enhanced Contextual Recommendation using Social Media Data
Anirban Chakraborty

ADAPT Centre, School of Computer Science and Statistics
Trinity College Dublin, Ireland
anirban.chakraborty@adaptcentre.ie
Document Ranking: Inspired by the work of Efron et al. [2], I propose a log-linear retrieval model for document ranking using Kernel
Density Estimation (KDE), taking space (POI locations) into account,
which will eventually rank POIs. Almost everything in this world
can be defined by time and space. It is possible to play with time
and/or space (location) for a query and/or document. This model
gives us the flexibility to combine heterogeneous evidence and integrate arbitrary features. I will try different ranking approaches
and/or fusion techniques to find the best model which will explore
"What is the most effective ranking approach for location-aware
contextual POI recommendation?".
Further Context from Opinions: Tweets often take the form of
a "review", giving insight into the tweeter’s spontaneous opinion
about what they interact with in thier lives, be it a museum, hotel,
restaurant etc. One way to capture this unique type of users’ opinion
is to conduct a task-based user study similar to [1] where users
are given a set of different tasks to search for and mark tweets
that give useful information about entities/POIs in given context(s),
such as "in winter", "with spouse", "weekend break" etc. This task
is completed in a controlled environment to capture users’ clicks
and ratings and to create a query log dataset that can provide
useful (contextual) information about POIs. I will also explore NLP
techniques to recognize and disambiguate entities (POI) from tweets
and analyse the sentiment towards each entity that is present as an
opinion. Calculating a sentiment score for the POI in a given context
will allow me to incorporate the effect of social media in my retrieval
model which will eventually answer "To what extent can social
media data supplement the recommendation process, and what are
the challenges in capturing valuable contextual information about
POIs from the opinions present on social media, such as Twitter?".

ABSTRACT
Making recommendations to a user which are more refined, personalized and contextually appropriate, has become an important
problem in a variety of domains. Contextual Point of Interest (POI)
recommendation is of particular revelance for travel and tourism, to
suggest places to visit for a user traveling to a particular city. I propose an approach which frames contextual POI recommendation
as a traditional document ranking problem, where I represent each
POI as a document. I will investigate whether social media data
such as Twitter can supplement the recommendation process. I follow the TREC Contextual Suggestion track setup for my evaluation
methodology.
Document Representation: A significant aspect of this research
investigates the generation of an enriched document representation for a POI, by harvesting different information (descriptive,
categorical, temporal etc.) from multiple sources. Foursquare and
Yelp are two of the most popular location-based social networks
(LBSNs) among researchers to crawl additional data such as ratings
and reviews to better predict a POI’s appropriateness. Along with
this, social media such as Twitter can be a very useful source of
information for contextual suggestion. For instance, if someone
tweets an image of an amazing view of the Eiffel tower from a hotel
balcony, it indirectly indicates that this hotel could be of interest
for someone looking for accommodation close to the Eiffel tower
with good views. This study will explore "To what extent can a
document representation for a POI be effectively generated using
the POI’s web-page and related LBSN pages?".
Location Specific Contextual Suggestion: Location is a piece of
context information that is specifically important in the context
of travel and POI recommendation as people have to physically
travel to the POI, thus location plays a crucial role. E.g. It may not
be suitable to recommend "Johnnie Fox’s Pub" (a very popular Irish
pub and tourist attraction, but quite far away from Trinity College,
Dublin) when the user is near to Trinity College. Recommending
Johnnie Fox’s Pub is not reasonable, unless the person in question
has a car, and/or particularly likes this type of attraction and as
a result may be willing to consider travelling to reach it. Even
more interesting, at what point (recommendation score) does a POI
become so interesting/relevant for the individual, that it should
be recommended even if it is difficult to get to and would take
significant effort.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems → Personalization; Information retrieval
diversity; Recommender systems; Probabilistic retrieval models;

KEYWORDS
Contextual Recommendation, Kernel Density Estimation, Microblogs
ACM Reference Format:
Anirban Chakraborty. 2018. Enhanced Contextual Recommendation using
Social Media Data. In SIGIR ’18: The 41st International ACM SIGIR Conference
on Research & Development in Information Retrieval, July 8–12, 2018, Ann
Arbor, MI, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1 page. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3209978.3210223

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’18, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
© 2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5657-2/18/07.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210223

REFERENCES
[1] Anirban Chakraborty. 2017. Exploring Search Behaviour in Microblogs. In FDIA
2017. https://doi.org/10.14236/ewic/FDIA2017.8
[2] Miles Efron, Jimmy Lin, Jiyin He, and Arjen de Vries. 2014. Temporal Feedback for
Tweet Search with Non-parametric Density Estimation. In SIGIR ’14, pages 33–42.

1455

