Workshop

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

The Second Workshop on Knowledge Graphs and Semantics for
Text Retrieval, Analysis, and Understanding (KG4IR)
Laura Dietz

Chenyan Xiong

University of New Hampshire
Durham, NH, USA
dietz@cs.unh.edu

Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
cx@cs.cmu.edu

Jeff Dalton

Edgar Meij

University of Glasgow
Glasgow, United Kingdom
jeff.dalton@glasgow.ac.uk

Bloomberg
London, United Kingdom
edgar.meij@acm.org

ABSTRACT

also proprietary KGs such as Google’s Knowledge Graph and Microsoft’s Satori. The availability of large, heterogeneous knowledge
graphs and grounding techniques such as entity linking gave rise
to successful improvements for many information retrieval (IR)
tasks. Entity retrieval from KGs has been a long-studied IR research
topic for many years [1, 4, 12, 26]. The utilization of entities and
KG information for text-centric retrieval tasks has also drawn wide
attention recently.
In particular, the semantics encoded in KGs are effectively integrated in query representation [5, 8, 11, 22], retrieval models [5,
15, 18], learning-to-rank [21], and generic representations [18]. Recent top-tier IR conferences feature many other papers on search
systems are exploiting knowledge graphs [9, 13, 14, 19, 20, 23–
25]. Some of these systems have also participated in TREC evaluations [16] or led to development of new TREC tracks [6]. Despite
these successes, the utilization of knowledge graphs and semantics
in information retrieval is still in its infancy and the community is
actively working on how the different kinds of semantics in KGs
can be utilized to improve end-to-end IR tasks.
In addition, many questions around improving text retrieval,
analysis, and understanding remain unanswered, including the following: (i) How do we most effectively (and efficiently!) identify
and align entities and structured information in KGs to unstructured text? (ii) What is the role of entities and semantics in modern intelligent systems? (iii) How can neural information systems
effectively leverage knowledge graphs?
Answering these open questions will lead to the next generation
of more intelligent IR systems. These questions require researchers
with varying backgrounds to come together from separate communities working on different aspects of knowledge graphs, semantics, and IR. The research on knowledge acquisition and alignment
often overlooks their applications in text-centric information retrieval systems. Similarly, in IR research knowledge graph acquisition and alignment technologies are often treated as black boxes.
This mismatch in research goals leads to combined systems that do
not live up to their full potential. The main goal of this workshop is
to bring together researchers on knowledge graph population and
alignment with IR researchers. Together we will work towards the
ultimate goals of: (i) acquiring semantics for focused application
needs, (ii) aligning efforts around KGs and texts towards end-toend usage, and (iii) building IR systems that more effectively utilize
KGs, semantics, and alignment techniques.

Semantic technologies such as controlled vocabularies, thesauri,
and knowledge graphs have been used throughout the history of
information retrieval for a variety of tasks. Recent advances in
knowledge acquisition, alignment, and utilization have given rise
to a body of new approaches for utilizing knowledge graphs in
text retrieval tasks and it is therefore time to consolidate the community efforts and study how such technologies can be employed
in information retrieval systems in the most effective way. It is
also time to start and deepen the dialogue between researchers
and practitioners in order to ensure that breakthroughs, technologies, and algorithms in this space are widely disseminated. The goal
of this workshop is to bring together and grow a community of
researchers and practitioners who are interested in using, aligning, and constructing knowledge graphs and similar semantic resources for information retrieval applications.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems → Presentation of retrieval results;

KEYWORDS
Knowledge graphs, Information Retrieval, Entity Linking, Entity
Retrieval, Entity-Oriented Search
ACM Reference Format:
Laura Dietz, Chenyan Xiong, Jeff Dalton, and Edgar Meij. 2018. The Second Workshop on Knowledge Graphs and Semantics for Text Retrieval,
Analysis, and Understanding (KG4IR). In SIGIR ’18: 41st International ACM
SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval,
July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 4 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210196

1

OVERVIEW

The past decade has witnessed the emergence of publicly available
knowledge graphs (KGs) such as DBpedia, Freebase, WikiData, and
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’18, July 8–12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
© 2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5657-2/18/07.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210196

1423

Workshop

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

3

Our workshop at last year’s SIGIR was a success with more than
50 registered attendees [7]. The program included six great keynote
speakers, diverse panel speakers, and eight accepted paper presentations. The participants spanned both academia and industry and
provided extremely positive feedback. Given the open research topics that remain, we aim to continue the workshop series. Moreover, there have been several key advances in the field of KG4IR in
the past year. As advocated by our previous workshop, more integrated systems that perform the acquisition, alignment, and utilization of KG jointly have been developed [9, 13, 14, 17, 19, 20, 24]. We
are also encouraged to see that the utilization of knowledge graphs
and semantics influenced a broader set of IR applications, for example, dialog systems [10] and recommendation systems [2, 3].
The TREC Complex Answer Retrieval [6] track provides a basis
for evaluating both entity centric and text centric approaches on
an openly available large-scale benchmark. With the rapid growth
in this area, it is important to build momentum in this field by hosting the second KG4IR workshop that will facilitate the exchange of
new ideas, encourage deeper dialogue, and also to expand the community of IR researchers involved in utilizing knowledge graphs.

2

UPDATES FROM LAST WORKSHOP

We hosted the first KG4IR workshop as a full-day workshop at SIGIR 2017 [7], attracting more than 50 registrants, 6 invited talks, 8
contributed papers, and a joint discussion panel with the OKBQA
workshop. This year we aim to continue our vision of promoting
KG4IR and serve as a platform for widening participation in the
community. In addition, there are several major upgrades and differences that motivated us to propose this workshop for a second
iteration.
New Applications — There are new advances in utilizing KGs
for many new applications, e.g., dialog systems, recommendation
systems, and reading comprehension systems. The development
of task-focused knowledge acquisition and alignment technologies
are also promising trends.
New Techniques — The development of new techniques and
the continued growth of deep learning approaches to learning the
relevance of output from relation extraction and subgraph prediction for KGs. These techniques lead to new approaches to extract,
align, and utilize knowledge and semantics while raising different needs for structured semantics. Our workshop will provide a
platform for researchers to communicate and discuss the recent
advancements of these new technologies and their influence on
KG4IR.
New Modalities — The importance of multi-modal retrieval has
continued to grow. There are now rich KGs that go beyond text to
also include music, images, and video. These have very different
retrieval mechanisms as ways of utilizing KGs. Advances in acquisition and alignment using deep learning approaches are allowing
significant new applications to explore in KG4IR.
Cross-fertilization with the Semantics track at SIGIR —
This year SIGIR has broadened its scope with a multi-track system
that features a track on “AI, Semantics, and Dialog.” This is a great
opportunity for our workshop as one of our goals is to facilitate discussion and build a community around incorporating semantics in
IR systems.
IRJ Special Issue on Knowledge Graphs and Semantics in
Text Analysis and Retrieval — The Information Retrieval Journal is soliciting submissions to the Special Issue on Knowledge
Graphs and Semantics in Text Analysis and Retrieval. The submission deadlines between the workshop papers and special issue
papers are synchronized to offer appropriate venues for research
in all stages. Authors of the accepted special issue papers will be
speaking about their work at the workshop.
Tutorial on Utilizing Knowledge Graphs for Text-centric
Information Retrieval — Furthermore, we are offering a SIGIR
conference tutorial on foundations and best practices on utilizing
knowledge graphs for text-centric information retrieval. The goal
is to jump-start any information retrieval researcher who is interested in contributing to this line of work in the future.

THEME AND PURPOSE

This workshop focuses on the end-to-end utilization of knowledge
graphs and semantics in text retrieval and IR applications. The
scope includes the acquisition, alignment, and utilization of
knowledge graphs and semantic resources for the purpose of optimizing end-to-end performance of a system that responds to a
user’s information need.
• Acquisition refers to knowledge graph population and semantic resource construction with a particular emphasis on enabling IR-related techniques and applications. Examples include
domain/task-specific knowledge graph construction, knowledge
representation, and query-time knowledge extraction.
• Alignment refers to the semantic annotation of text. This
includes entity linking of keyword queries as well as queryfocused relation extraction for satisfying information needs. It
also includes information integration, ontology matching, entity
search, and knowledge graph selection based on an information
need.
• Utilization refers to using knowledge graphs and semantics
in text-centric retrieval tasks. Examples include utilizing the
knowledge graph to improve ad hoc document retrieval, factoid
question answering, understanding user queries, knowledgefocused diversification and summarization of SERPs, tracking of
events, and retrieval of complex answers.
This workshop aims to not only bring together researchers and
practitioners in related fields, but more importantly experts on
graphs, semantics, and information extraction with experts on text
retrieval, analysis, and query understanding. The goal is to discuss
ongoing research and best practices with the aim of addressing
open research challenges. Our mission includes: (i) facilitating discussions between researchers working on acquisition, alignment,
and utilization of KG technologies for IR applications, (ii) serving
as an incubator for long-term research on resource construction
and end-to-end utilization, and (iii) collecting datasets, tasks, and
evaluations to study IR algorithms in the context of KGs.

4

RELATED WORKSHOPS

While a large number of workshops and tutorials on KGs are held
in different venues, they focus either on KG construction, semantic search, or other applications; none of them have the focus on
IR that we advocate. Our main focus lies on the use of KGs for retrieving, analyzing, and understanding text. By focusing on text as

1424

Workshop

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Table 1: Confirmed program committee members.

the main target, our workshop differentiates itself from the general semantic search and knowledge graph topics. Nevertheless,
we aim for a broadly inclusive community, encouraging participation from researchers with expertise in information extraction,
semantic search, and text retrieval with the goal of promoting joint
research.
Exploiting Semantic Annotations for IR (ESAIR) is the
most closely related workshop as it focuses on the exploitation of
semantic annotations in information retrieval. It was successfully
hosted at CIKM for many years, but the series is currently on hold.
Our workshop builds upon the results from ESAIR with a broader
scope on graph-structured knowledge with respect to construction,
alignment, and utilization for IR tasks. Jeff Dalton was one of the
organizers of this series.
Automated Knowledge Base Construction (AKBC) focuses
on population techniques using information extraction and information integration. It is a very successful workshop and has been
held in multiple conference such as NAACL, NIPS, and CIKM. Its
focus on construction is complementary to our focus on utilization.
Entity Recognition and Disambiguation (ERD) focused on
entity linking in long (document) and short (query) texts. It has
been held only once, at SIGIR 2014. In fact, many of the query entity linking systems used and presented in the ERD workshop have
served as a critical step in KG4IR research. We also note that many
representatives from this community are included in our workshop’s program committee.
KB Construction, Reasoning and Mining (KBCOM) is a
new workshop co-located with WSDM 2018 with a broad scope
that includes knowledge graph construction, reasoning, and applications. The scope is similar to AKBC, but also includes reasoning
and applications.
Open Knowledge Base and Question Answering (OKBQA)
and Question Answering over Linked Data (QALD) are workshops on question answering using the structure of knowledge
graphs. In contrast, the KG4IR workshop focuses on longer texts
and natural language queries.
Open Knowledge Network (OKN) is a US-based network created by Yolanda Gill, RV Guha, Sharat Israni, Andrew Moore, and
Louiqa Rashid with the aim to further the development of KGs
available to everyone. Both Laura Dietz and Edgar Meij are active
members of this network.

5

Name

Affiliation

Esraa Ali
Mohammad Aliannejadi
Avishek Anand
Bogdan Arsintescu
Marc Bron
Tongfei Chen
Bhavana Dalvi
Arjen de Vries
John Foley
Ingo Frommholz
Faegheh Hasibi
Xiangnan He
Johannes Hoffart
Ioana Hulpus
Rose Catherine Kanjirathinkal
Alexander Kotov
Huang Lifu
Kwan Hui Lim
Xitong Liu
Bhaskar Mitra
Federico Nanni
Giulio Ermanno Pibiri
Jay Pujara
Pushpendre Rastogi
Hadas Raviv
Achim Rettinger
Benjamin Roth
Pedro Saleiro
Bahareh Sarrafzadeh
Michael Schuhmacher
Yu Su
Camilo Thorne
Salvatore Trani
Suzan Verberne
Nikos Voskarides
Lydia Weiland
Arie Wahyu Wijayanto
Jun Xu
Hai-Tao Yu
Hamed Zamani
Yuan Zhang

ADAPT research centre
University of Lugano
L3S Research Center
LinkedIn
Schibsted
Johns Hopkins University
Allen Institute for AI
Radboud University and Spinque
University of Massachusetts
University of Bedfordshire
NUST
National University of Singapore
Ambiverse and Max Planck Institute
Mannheim University
Carnegie Mellon University
Wayne State
Renssalaer Polytechnic Institute
University of Melbourne
Google
Microsoft
Mannheim University
University of Pisa and ISTI-CNR
University of Southern California
Johns Hopkins University
Technion
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
Ludwigs Maximilians Universitaet
University of Chicago
University of Waterloo
BASF
University of California
University of Stuttgart
ISTI-CNR
Leiden University
University of Amsterdam
Mannheim University
Tokyo Institute of Technology
Chinese Academic of Science
University of Tsukuba
University of Massachusetts
Peking University

Finally, the presentations are complemented with a poster session and a panel discussion. The panel discussion will facilitate dialogue on a diverse range of the issues raised in this workshop,
possibly including the following:
• Lessons learned using knowledge graphs and semantics in IR
• Demands for KG and alignment techniques for utilization
• Mechanisms to encourage task-oriented development of KG’s
and corresponding techniques
• Future benchmarks for KG-aware alignment and retrieval models
• Possible ways to facilitate future research and reproducibility in
this area

WORKSHOP PROGRAM

The full-day workshop features a combination of talks, poster sessions, and panel discussion.
Keynote talks are selected that are well-known in the field, maintaining a healthy balance between industry and academia and
providing a fresh perspective on the topic. Presentations on contributed position papers will give an overview of ongoing efforts.
Furthermore, we solicited talk abstracts, inviting community members to share their ideas and perspectives. Authors of papers in our
“KG4IR” special issue in the Information Retrieval Journal are encouraged to give an overview of their work.

The final workshop program is available at https://kg4ir.github.io.

6

ORGANIZERS

Prof. Dr. Laura Dietz is an Assistant Professor at University
of New Hampshire. Before that she was a research scientist at
Mannheim University and University of Massachusetts after graduating from the Max Planck Institute for Informatics. Her research
focuses on information retrieval on knowledge-centric information needs. Her scientific contributions span from query expansion

1425

Workshop

SIGIR’18, July 8-12, 2018, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

with entities to the prediction of influences in citation graphs. She
coordinates the TREC Complex Answer Retrieval track.
Chenyan Xiong is a final-year Ph.D. student at the Language
Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University. His research
focuses on using knowledge graphs and semantics to improve text
understanding in search engines. He has published many KG4IR
papers in top venues SIGIR, CIKM, ICTIR, and WWW.
Dr. Jeff Dalton is Lecturer in Information Retrieval at the University of Glasgow. Previously, he was a Software Engineer Google,
where projects included the Google Assistant Natural Language
Understanding and the Knowledge Vault efforts on automatic
knowledge graph construction. He completed his Ph.D. at the University of Massachusetts Amherst with James Allan in the Center
for Intelligent Information Retrieval. His research focuses on the
intersection of Information Retrieval and Natural Language Processing. He publishes papers on using knowledge graphs for IR at
leading conferences including SIGIR, CIKM, and others.
Dr. Edgar Meij is a senior scientist at Bloomberg where he also
leads a team focusing on graph analytics and semantic technologies. Before this, he was a research scientist at Yahoo Labs and a
postdoc at the University of Amsterdam, where he also obtained
his Ph.D. He regularly teaches at the (post-)graduate level, including university courses and conference tutorials, e.g., at EACL, ICTIR, SIGIR, WWW, and WSDM. His research focuses on all applications and aspects of knowledge graphs, entity linking, and semantic search.

[5] Jeffrey Dalton, Laura Dietz, and James Allan. 2014. Entity Query Feature Expansion using Knowledge Base Links. In Proceedings SIGIR 2014. ACM, 365–374.
[6] Laura Dietz, Manisha Verma, Filip Radlinski, and Nick Craswell. 2018. TREC
Complex Answer Retrieval Overview. In Text REtrieval Conference (TREC).
[7] Laura Dietz, Chenyan Xiong, and Edgar Meij. 2017. The First Workshop on
Knowledge Graphs and Semantics for Text Retrieval and Analysis (KG4IR). In
Proceedings of the 40th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR 2017). ACM, 1427–1428.
[8] Faezeh Ensan and Ebrahim Bagheri. 2017. Document retrieval model through
semantic linking. In Proceedings of WSDM 2017. ACM, 181–190.
[9] Dario Garigliotti, Faegheh Hasibi, and Krisztian Balog. 2017. Target Type Identification for Entity-Bearing Queries. (2017).
[10] Marjan Ghazvininejad, Chris Brockett, Ming-Wei Chang, Bill Dolan, Jianfeng
Gao, Wen-tau Yih, and Michel Galley. 2017. A knowledge-grounded neural conversation model. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.01932 (2017).
[11] Faegheh Hasibi, Krisztian Balog, and Svein Erik Bratsberg. 2015. Entity Linking
in Queries: Tasks and Evaluation. In Proceedings of ICTIR 2015. ACM, 171–180.
[12] Faegheh Hasibi, Krisztian Balog, and Svein Erik Bratsberg. 2016. Exploiting Entity Linking in Queries for Entity Retrieval. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM on
International Conference on the Theory of Information Retrieval. ACM, 209–218.
[13] Faegheh Hasibi, Krisztian Balog, and Svein Erik Bratsberg. 2017. Dynamic Factual Summaries for Entity Cards. In Proceedings of the 40th International ACM
SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval. ACM,
773–782.
[14] Amina Kadry and Laura Dietz. 2017. Open Relation Extraction for Support Passage Retrieval: Merit and Open Issues. In Proceedings of SIGIR 2017.
[15] Xitong Liu and Hui Fang. 2015. Latent entity space: A novel retrieval approach
for entity-bearing queries. Information Retrieval Journal 18, 6 (2015), 473–503.
[16] Xitong Liu, Peilin Yang, and Hui Fang. 2014. Entity came to rescue - Leveraging
entities to minimize risks in web search. In Proceedings of The 23st Text Retrieval
Conference, (TREC 2014). NIST.
[17] Federico Nanni, Simone Paolo Ponzetto, and Laura Dietz. 2017. Building entitycentric event collections. In Digital Libraries (JCDL), 2017 ACM/IEEE Joint Conference on. IEEE, 1–10.
[18] Hadas Raviv, Oren Kurland, and David Carmel. 2016. Document retrieval using
entity-based language models. In Proceedings of SIGIR 2016. ACM, 65–74.
[19] Rebecca Sharp, Mihai Surdeanu, Peter Jansen, Marco A Valenzuela-Escárcega,
Peter Clark, and Michael Hammond. 2017. Tell Me Why: Using Question Answering as Distant Supervision for Answer Justification. In Proceedings of the
21st Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning (CoNLL 2017). 69–
79.
[20] Nikos Voskarides, Edgar Meij, and Maarten de Rijke. 2017. Generating descriptions of entity relationships. In European Conference on Information Retrieval.
Springer, 317–330.
[21] Chenyan Xiong and Jamie Callan. 2015. EsdRank: Connecting query and documents through external semi-structured data. In Proceedings of CIKM 2015. ACM,
951–960.
[22] Chenyan Xiong and Jamie Callan. 2015. Query expansion with Freebase. In
Proceedings of ICTIR 2015. ACM, 111–120.
[23] Chenyan Xiong, Jamie Callan, and Tie-Yan Liu. 2016. Bag-of-Entities representation for ranking. In Proceedings of the sixth ACM International Conference on
the Theory of Information Retrieval (ICTIR 2016). ACM, 181–184.
[24] Chenyan Xiong, Zhengzhong Liu, Jamie Callan, and Eduard H. Hovy. 2017.
JointSem: Combining Query Entity Linking and Entity based Document Ranking. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on Conference on Information and Knowledge
Management (CIKM 2017). 2391–2394.
[25] Chenyan Xiong, Russell Power, and Jamie Callan. 2017. Explicit semantic ranking for academic search via knowledge graph embedding. In Proceedings WWW
2017. ACM, 1271–1279.
[26] Nikita Zhiltsov, Alexander Kotov, and Fedor Nikolaev. 2015. Fielded Sequential
Dependence Model for Ad-Hoc Entity Retrieval in the Web of Data. In Proceedings of SIGIR 2015. ACM, 253–262.

Acknowledgements
C. Xiong is funded on NSF solicitation IIS-1422676. L. Dietz is supported by a scholarship of the Eliteprogramm for Postdocs of the
Baden-Württemberg Stiftung. Any opinions, findings expressed in
this material are the authors’ and do not necessarily reflect those
of the sponsor.

REFERENCES
[1] Krisztian Balog and Robert Neumayer. 2013. A test collection for entity search
in dbpedia. In Proceedings of the 36th international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval (SIGIR 2013). ACM, 737–740.
[2] Rose Catherine and William Cohen. 2016. Personalized recommendations using
knowledge graphs: A probabilistic logic programming approach. In Proceedings
of the 10th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. ACM, 325–332.
[3] Rose Catherine, Kathryn Mazaitis, Maxine Eskenazi, and William Cohen. 2017.
Explainable Entity-based Recommendations with Knowledge Graphs. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1707.05254 (2017).
[4] Jing Chen, Chenyan Xiong, and Jamie Callan. 2016. An Empirical Study of Learning to Rank for Entity Search. In Proceedings of SIGIR 2016. ACM, 737–740.

1426

