ACM-W 2014-2015 Athena Lecture

Putting Searchers into Search
Susan T. Dumais
Microsoft Research
Redmond, Washington, USA
sdumais@microsoft.com

Abstract

Keywords
Athena lecture; information retrieval; human-computer interaction;
user modeling; evaluation

Over the last two decades the information retrieval
landscape has changed dramatically. Twenty years ago,
there were fewer than 3k web sites and the earliest web
search engines indexed approximately 50k pages. Today,
search engines index billions of web pages, images, videos,
news, music, social media, books, etc., and have become the
main entry point for a wide range of information, services,
communications and entertainment. Despite these
tremendous accomplishments, we still have a long way to
go. Many searches are unsuccessful, and even those that
succeed are often harder than they should be. To address
these challenges we need to extend our evaluation methods
to handle the diversity of searchers, tasks, and interactivity
that characterize information systems today. I will discuss
recent work on user modeling and temporal dynamics of
information systems to illustrate the power of utilizing
converging lines of evidence from laboratory, panel, and
large-scale log techniques to understand and support
searchers.

Short Bio
Susan Dumais a Distinguished
Scientist at Microsoft and Deputy
Managing
Director
of
the
Microsoft Research Lab in
Redmond.
Prior to joining
Microsoft Research, she was at
Bell Labs and Bellcore, where she
worked on Latent Semantic Analysis, techniques for
combining search and navigation, and organizational
impacts of new technology. Her current research focuses on
user modeling and personalization, context and search and
temporal dynamics of information. She has worked closely
with several Microsoft groups (Bing, Windows Desktop
Search, SharePoint, and Office Online Help) on searchrelated innovations. Susan has published widely in the
fields of information science, human-computer interaction
and cognitive science, and holds several patents on novel
retrieval algorithms and interfaces. Susan is also an adjunct
professor in the Information School at the University of
Washington. She is Past-Chair of ACM's Special Interest
Group in Information Retrieval (SIGIR), and serves on
several editorial boards, technical program committees, and
government panels. She was elected to the CHI Academy in
2005, an ACM Fellow in 2006, received the SIGIR Gerard
Salton Award for Lifetime Achievement in 2009, and was
elected to the National Academy of Engineering (NAE) in
2011.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search and
Retrieval – query formulation, retrieval models, search process.
H.5 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage, and that copies bear this notice and the full
citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must
be honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). Copyright is held by the
author/owner(s).
SIGIR'14, July 6–11, 2014, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.
ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2617557

1

