Mobile Query Reformulations
Milad Shokouhi

Rosie Jones

Umut Ozertem

Microsoft
Cambridge, UK

Microsoft
Cambridge, MA

Microsoft
Sunnyvale, CA

milads@microsoft.com
Karthik Raghunathan

rojone@microsoft.com

umuto@microsoft.com
Fernando Diaz

Microsoft
Sunnyvale, CA

Microsoft
New York, NY

fdiaz@microsoft.com

kraghu@microsoft.com
ABSTRACT

with additional modalities such as gestures and speech. The ability
to interact with software through speech has resulted in an increase
in the number of queries spoken to search systems. For example,
Google reported in 2010, that 25% of queries on Android devices
are submitted by voice.2
In this paper, we study the query reformulation patterns in mobile
logs. We conduct a large-scale analysis over the query logs of the
Bing search engine and demonstrate the differences in query distribution conditioned on the input method (voice or text). We show
that there are fundamental differences in the query distributions
and characteristics of query-reformulations in mobile and desktop
logs. We verify and confirm some of the patterns reported in recent
lab studies [7] over a large-scale dataset. We also compare various
statistics such as overall reformulation effectiveness per input type
that cannot be collected at scale in the lab due to natural limitations of such lab studies. Our results suggested that users rarely
switch between different input methods. That is, if the submitted
query is typed, the reformulation is also likely to be typed and if the
submitted query is by voice, then the reformulation is likely to be
submitted as a voice query too.
In addition, we compare the distribution and taxonomy of mobile reformulations against desktop logs. Our comparative analysis
reveals that text reformulations are similar across desktop and mobile logs. However, when users switch from voice to text, they are
relatively more likely to substitute their query words to correct the
speech recognizer errors. Switches from text to voice often happen
when the user is searching for a new intent, and overall users are
less likely to use abbreviations in their mobile queries.

Users frequently interact with web search systems on their mobile
devices via multiple modalities, including touch and speech. These
interaction modes are substantially different from the user experience on desktop. As a result, system designers have new challenges
and questions around understanding the intent on these platforms.
In this paper, we study the query reformulation patterns in mobile
logs. We group query reformulations based on their input method
into four categories; text-text, text-voice, voice-text and voice-voice.
We discuss the unique characteristics of each of these groups by
comparing them against each other and desktop logs. We also compare the distribution of reformulation types (e.g. adding/dropping
words) against desktop logs and show that there are new classes of
reformulations that are caused by errors in speech recognition.
Our results suggest that users do not tend to switch between
different input types (e.g. voice and text). Voice to text switches
are largely caused by speech recognition errors, and text to voice
switches are unlikely to be about the same intent.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
Information Systems [Information Retrieval]: Information retrieval
query processing—Query reformulation

Keywords
Speech retrieval; speech recognition; mobile search

1.

INTRODUCTION

2.

People increasingly rely on mobile devices for various tasks,
including web search. The volume of mobile queries has grown
exponentially in recent years and is expected to exceed the number
of queries submitted from desktop devices by next year.1 In addition
to traditional keyboard based input, mobile devices provide users
1

RELATED WORK

Query Reformulation & Rewriting. Users frequently reformulate queries throughout sessions to complete their search tasks
[8]. Several taxonomies of query reformulation have been suggested
in the past [1, 5]. However, all these studies focused on desktop
queries and were published before mobile devices became popular.
The information retrieval literature is rich with related techniques
that leverage query reformulations and clicks in the past user logs,
however, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first large-scale
study on mobile query reformulations.
Users tend to reformulate their queries when they are not happy
with search results [4]. Hence, query-reformulation patterns can
be used to guide query re-writing. In such applications, query
reformulations are either mined and aggregated over the entire query

http://selnd.com/1maZlXC, last accessed 6 May 2014.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request
permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR’14, July 6–11, 2014, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.
Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07 ...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2609497.

2

1011

http://bit.ly/Ljpy8A, last accessed 6 May 2014.

3.

80 100
60
40

13.3
2.9

1.5

V2T

T2V

0

Mobile Search. Kamvar and Baluja [10] presented one of the
earliest large-scale analyses of mobile search queries. Compared
to desktop queries, they found mobile searches to be topically less
diverse, although similar in terms of the number of words and character in queries. They reported that users take substantially longer
time to issue their queries on mobile devices and they suggested
that this extra “effort” may explain why they observed on average
fewer queries per session in their logs. The authors later conducted
a similar analysis on more recent logs collected in 2007 (compared
to 2005 for the original study) [11]. They found that in more recent mobile searches, users were typing faster and clicking on more
results, and sessions were longer and less homogeneous.3
Church et al. [3] studied the mobile internet requests of more than
600,000 European mobile subscribers over a day in 2005.4 Their
results suggested that browsing happens substantially more often
than searching on mobile devices, although search sessions were
generally found to be longer than browsing sessions. They also
found mobile queries to be on average shorter and more repetitive
compared to desktop. The authors also reported that users are more
likely to reformulate their mobile queries, making mobile search
sessions on average longer than those on desktop.
Kamvar and Baluja [12] showed that contextual signals such
as the application being used, and the user’s location improve the
ranking of query auto-completion suggestions on mobile devices.
Kamvar and Beeferman [13] reported that users are more likely to
use voice as their input method for local queries particularly on
smaller keyboards, and are less likely do so for longer queries.
Most related to our work, Jiang et al. [7] conducted a lab experiment with 20 participants to study the query reformulation patterns
of users when searching with mobile devices. They reported that
speech recognition errors happen in about half of voice queries. In
such cases, performance is often significantly affected, and users
tend to reformulate their queries by removing and substituting words,
which on average leads to slightly better queries and performance.
In a follow up study, Jeng et al. [6] reported that users usually find
voice search more challenging due to voice input errors caused by
misrecognition of acronyms, pronunciations and other factors.
In another similar study, Schalkwyk et al. [16] compared the
topical categories of mobile queries versus desktop. This paper
however focuses on mobile query reformulations specifically.

82.3

20

%Reformulations

logs [9] or they are alternatively captured in context to personalize
search [17] and query suggestions [14].

T2T

V2V

Figure 1: Distribution of reformulation modalities in the mobile
search logs of a commercial search engine; text to text (T2T), voice
to voice (V2V), voice to text (V2T) and text to voice (T2V).

follow a similar distribution. Jiang et al. [7] focused on mobile
reformulations but specifically voice to voice reformulations. While
they noted that there are different types of reformulations (e.g. add
words, remove words) in mobile search as well, they did not provide
any statistics about the distribution of these reformulations. In
addition, none of the previous studies investigates the properties of
query reformulations with respect to their input method (voice to
voice, text to text, text to voice, and voice to text).
The analyses in this paper address this gap. We investigate the
distribution of different types of reformulations on mobile devices
and compare them against a desktop query log. We also study the
properties of query reformulation separately for each input method.

Modality in mobile search logs. On mobile devices, people
can choose to search by voice or text. As a result, in a search session,
not all queries are necessarily submitted with the same input method.
Here, we present a break-down of query reformulations based on
their input method. For our analysis, we sample the mobile search
query logs of the Bing search engine between 1 October 2013 and
31 October 2013 (1 month). In total there are 2,643,283 multi-query
sessions containing 7,668,809 distinct queries from 706,763 unique
users in our sample dataset.
We follow the common definition of a search session [2, 19] and
define each session as a sequence of search actions (e.g. queries,
clicks) with no periods of inactivity longer than 30 minutes. Investigating the most effective techniques for classifying session
boundaries in mobile logs is itself an interesting area which is left
for future work. For our study, we decided to go with the common choice of 30-minute inactivity windows to make our results
comparable with previous work.
Figure 1 illustrates the distribution of reformulation modalities in
our mobile dataset computed over all successive query pairs. Each
query reformulation pair (q1 , q2 ) consists of a pair of consecutive
queries that appeared in the same search session. Here, text to text,
voice to voice, voice to text and text to voice reformulations are
respectively denoted by T2T, V2V, V2T, and T2V and represent
cases where the first query was submitted by one input method, and
the following query by another. There are at least two key trends
that immediately stand out when looking at these distributions: (1)
users do not tend to switch between different input methods. If
they have typed their first query, their next query is also likely to be

QUERY REFORMULATIONS

Huang and Efthimiadis [5] categorized query reformulations in
desktop search logs into 12 groups; word reorder, whitespace and
punctuation, add words, remove words, url stripping, stemming,
acronym, substring, superstring, abbreviation, word substitution,
and spelling correction. Jiang et al. [7] noted that in addition to
these 12 groups of lexical reformulations, there are other types of
phonetic reformulations that can be observed when people search
by voice. This latter group is largely caused by misrecognition of
query words by the speech recognizer, and the repeat of the same
(or a similar) query by the user. They reported based on a lab study
that users put more stress on the whole or certain parts of the query
when they reformulate their queries by voice.
Huang and Efthimiadis [5] focused entirely on desktop search
queries and did not verify if query reformulations in mobile logs
3

The query logs used in both studies only contained text queries.
Note that their analysis pre-dates the smart-phone era, hence some
of the findings may no longer be representative.
4

1012

Table 1: Distribution of reformulation types in mobile (H) query
logs, by modality. The last column (Ï) represents the distribution
over a typical sample of desktop query logs. Voice and text queries
are respectively denoted by V and T. The reformulation categories
presented here are based on the taxonomy suggested by Huang and
Efthimiadis [5] (excluding reformulations that were categorized as
new). For brevity we do not present those classes that accounted for
less then 1% of cases across all types of reformulations. Specifically,
these were form acronym, expand acronym, and word reorder.

typed and if they have issued a voice query, their next query is also
likely to be submitted by voice. (2) Switching between voice to text
– while infrequent – is still substantially more likely than the reverse
(text to voice). Further investigations – covered later in this section
– suggest that when users switch between text to voice, it is often
a new search with a new intent, while switches from voice to text
happen frequently when the original speech query is misrecognized
by the engine.

Query reformulation types. We follow the steps of Huang and
Reformulation

Efthimiadis [5] in categorizing query reformulations and comparing
their properties. They categorized query reformulations in search
logs into the following 12 groups:

Abbreviation
Add words
Remove words
Spell correct.
Stem compare
Sub-string
Sup-string
Space punct.
URL Strip
Word Subst.

1. Word reorder: query and reformulation share the same words
but in different order (e.g. quicktime download → download
quicktime).
2. Whitespace and punctuation: The reformulation is different from
the query only in whitespace and punctuations (e.g. quick time
→ quicktime).
3. Remove words: The reformulation consists of a subset of query
words (e.g. quicktime download → quicktime).
4. Add words: The query consists of a subset of reformulation
words (e.g. quicktime → quicktime download).

H
V2T
4%
38%
16%
23%
2%
1%
2%
0%
3%
11%

H
V2V
4%
57%
15%
10%
1%
1%
2%
1%
1%
7%

H
T2V
3%
47%
24%
8%
2%
1%
4%
2%
1%
7%

Ï
DES
12%
49%
12%
9%
1%
1%
2%
2%
3%
9%

reformulations in our desktop logs are categorized as new. Given
that desktop searches have been reported to be more successful than
mobile [3, 18], users are expected to satisfy their intents with fewer
queries, and the higher ratio of new reformulations is not surprising.
Similarly, the relatively high percentage of new T2V reformulations
suggests that when users switch from text to voice, they often form
a new session in terms of intent.
Table 1 contains the classification results on the mobile and desktop query logs excluding those reformulations that were categorized
as new. The mobile and desktop reformulations are respectively
specified by (H) and (Ï) symbols. Overall, there is a higher rate
of spell correction in mobile reformulations which is somewhat
expected given that the typing is generally easier on desktop devices.
Word substitution reformulations occur most frequently in mobile
searches when switching from voice to text (V2T). The substituted
words in many cases are the incorrect predictions from the speech
recognizer that had to be fixed by typing. In addition, URL stripping
occurs more often when the reformulated query is submitted via
text. People are more likely remove words in their mobile reformulations, and are unlikely to use abbreviations unless in their T2T
reformulations.
While the numbers in Table 1 provide an overview of the distributions of query reformulations in mobile and desktop logs, they
do not capture the effectiveness of such reformulations. Huang and
Efthimiadis [5] defined successful reformulations as those cases in
which the results for the original query received no clicks, but those
returned for the reformulations had at least one click (SkipClick).
Similarly, ClickSkip can be defined as those reformulations in which
the original query has a click but the reformulation does not, and can
be regarded as unsuccessful reformulations. Figure 2 illustrates the
distribution of ClickSkip and SkipClick reformulations in desktop
and mobile logs for different switches in modality. For comparison
purposes, we also present the results for ClickClick scenarios in
which both query and its reformulation had clicks on their results.
The SkipClick ratio is highest among voice to text (V2T) searches.
This again can be explained by speech correction errors that needed
to be fixed by typing. Text to voice (T2V) reformulations have
the lowest ratio of unsuccessful searches, and this again can be
explained by the fact that most of these reformulations are about

5. URL stripping: The query and reformulation are the same after
removing “.com”, “www” and “http:” from both sides (e.g. apple
→ http://www.apple.com).
6. Stemming: Query and reformulation share the same stem according to the Porter stemmer [15] (e.g. apple → apples).
7. Form acronym: The reformulation is the acronym form of the
query (e.g. information retrieval → ir).
8. Expand acronym: The query is acronym form of reformulation
(e.g. ir → information retrieval).
9. Substring: The reformulation is a substring of the query (e.g.
quicktime → quick).
10. Superstring: The query is a substring of the reformulation (e.g.
quick → quicktime).
11. Abbreviation: The corresponding words from the query and
reformulation are prefixes of each other (e.g. greenleaf co →
greenleaf colorado).
12. Word substitution: When one or more words in the query are
replaced with semantically related words in the reformulation
(e.g. obama bio → obama biography). The semantic relatedness
of words are determined according to the Wordnet database.5
We adopt the same taxonomy of Huang and Efthimiadis [5] and
use their classifier to categorize query reformulations. When a query
reformulation cannot be assigned to any of these groups it is called
new, and it is assumed that it does not share the same intent as last
query. This happened respectively for 64%, 72%, 74% and 91%
of T2T, V2T, V2V and T2V mobile reformulations in our dataset.
As a reference point, we also compare our results against a similar
set of desktop sessions sampled from Bing search logs between
1 June 2014 and 31 August 2013 (two months). In total, 94% of
5

H
T2T
8%
48%
17%
10%
2%
1%
2%
0%
2%
8%

http://wordnet.princeton.edu

1013

[4] A. Hassan, X. Shi, N. Craswell, and B. Ramsey. Beyond
clicks: Query reformulation as a predictor of search
satisfaction. In Proc. CIKM, pages 2019–2028. ACM, 2013.

Chart Title

100

[5] J. Huang and E. N. Efthimiadis. Analyzing and evaluating
query reformulation strategies in web search logs. In Proc.
CIKM, pages 77–86. ACM, 2009.

% Reformulations

70
60

50

80

60

40

SkipClick

30

ClickClick

40

20
10

ClickSkip

[7] J. Jiang, W. Jeng, and D. He. How do users respond to voice
input errors?: Lexical and phonetic query reformulation in
voice search. In Proc. SIGIR, pages 143–152, 2013.

20

0
0

1

2

T2T

3
ClickClick

V2V

4

ClickSkip

V2T

SkipClick

T2V

5

DES

[8] R. Jones and K. L. Klinkner. Beyond the session timeout:
automatic hierarchical segmentation of search topics in query
logs. In Proc. CIKM, pages 699–708, Napa Valley, CA, 2008.
[9] R. Jones, B. Rey, O. Madani, and W. Greiner. Generating
query substitutions. In Proc. WWW, pages 387–396,
Edinburgh, UK, 2006.

Figure 2: The percentage of query reformulations with at least
one click with respect to different input types; text to text (T2T),
voice to voice (V2V), voice to text (V2T), text to voice (T2V), and
desktop (DES). The colors represent the recorded clicks in a queryreformulation pair; SkipClick (green) the query had no clicks but
there was a click for its reformulation (successful reformulations)
ClickClick (yellow) cases, both original query and its following
reformulation were clicked, ClickSkip (orange) the query had a
click but its reformulation did not (unsuccessful reformulation).

[10] M. Kamvar and S. Baluja. A large scale study of wireless
search behavior: Google mobile search. In Proc. SIGCHI,
pages 701–709, Montreal, Canada, 2006.
[11] M. Kamvar and S. Baluja. Deciphering trends in mobile
search. Computer, 40(8):58–62, Aug. 2007. ISSN 0018-9162.
[12] M. Kamvar and S. Baluja. The role of context in query input:
Using contextual signals to complete queries on mobile
devices. In Proc. MobileHCI, pages 405–412, Singapore,
2007.

new intents and hence are expected to perform relatively better.6
Desktop reformulations (DES) have a higher ClickClick rate overall.
Given that desktop search sessions have been reported to be longer
and to have 20% higher clickthrough [18] these results are expected.

4.

[6] W. Jeng, J. Jiang, and D. He. Users’ perceived difficulties and
corresponding reformulation strategies in voice search. In
Proc. HCIR, Vancouver, Canada, 2013.

[13] M. Kamvar and D. Beeferman. Say what? why users choose
to speak their web queries. In T. Kobayashi, K. Hirose, and
S. Nakamura, editors, Proc. INTERSPEECH, pages
1966–1969, Makuhari, Japan, 2010. ISCA.

CONCLUSIONS

We presented a large-scale study of query reformulations in mobile search logs. Our results suggested that users rarely switch
between different input types unless they are searching for a new
intent or correcting speech recognizers errors. We showed that compared to searches on desktop, users are more likely to drop words
from and spell-correct their mobile queries and less likely to use
abbreviations.
In future work, we intend to investigate the effectiveness of using previous reformulations for improving the accuracy of speech
retrieval in mobile searches.

[14] Z. Liao, D. Jiang, E. Chen, J. Pei, H. Cao, and H. Li. Mining
concept sequences from large-scale search logs for
context-aware query suggestion. ACM Trans. Intell. Syst.
Technol., 3(1):17:1–17:40, Oct. 2011.
[15] M. F. Porter. An algorithm for suffix stripping. In Readings in
Information Retrieval, pages 313–316. Morgan Kaufmann
Publishers Inc., 1997.
[16] J. Schalkwyk, D. Beeferman, F. Beaufays, B. Byrne,
C. Chelba, M. Cohen, M. Kamvar, and B. Strope. Your word
is my command?: Google search by voice: A case study. In
Advances in Speech Recognition, pages 61–90. Springer US,
2010.

References
[1] P. Anick. Using terminological feedback for web search
refinement: A log-based study. In Proc. SIGIR, pages 88–95,
Toronto, Canada, 2003.
[2] P. N. Bennett, R. W. White, W. Chu, S. T. Dumais, P. Bailey,
F. Borisyuk, and X. Cui. Modeling the impact of short- and
long-term behavior on search personalization. In Proc. SIGIR,
pages 185–194, Portland, OR, 2012.

[17] X. Shen, B. Tan, and C. Zhai. Context-sensitive information
retrieval using implicit feedback. In Proc. SIGIR, pages
43–50, Salvador, Brazil, 2005.

[3] K. Church, B. Smyth, P. Cotter, and K. Bradley. Mobile
information access: A study of emerging search behavior on
the mobile internet. ACM Trans. Web, 1(1), 2007.

[18] Y. Song, H. Ma, H. Wang, and K. Wang. Exploring and
exploiting user search behavior on mobile and tablet devices
to improve search relevance. In Proc. WWW, Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil, 2013.

6
Note that users are unlikely to reformulate unless they are unhappy
with the original results [4]. Therefore relatively lower performance
of text to text (T2T) and voice to voice (V2V) cases is expected as
these are more likely to be searches about the same intent.

[19] R. White and S. M. Drucker. Investigating behavioral
variability in web search. In Proc. WWW, pages 21–30, Banff,
Alberta, Canada, 2007.

1014

