Document Summarization Based on Word Associations
Oskar Gross

Antoine Doucet

Hannu Toivonen

Department of Computer
Science and HIIT
University of Helsinki, Finland

GREYC, CNRS UMR 6072
University of Normandy,
Unicaen, France

Department of Computer
Science and HIIT
University of Helsinki, Finland

oskar.gross@cs.helsinki.fi

antoine.doucet@unicaen.fr

ABSTRACT

links they establish, e.g., between people, acts, events, and
places. We argue that associations at subtler levels can also
be important, even ones between adjectives or adverbs and
noun or verbs used in the news. Recognition of associations
is based on statistical analysis of word co-occurrences within
sentences. We believe that such associations reflect the key
ideas of news and are useful for selecting sentences.
(2) Novel associations in a document are recognized by
contrasting them against a background corpus. News stories
are supposed to tell something new and a key problem in
summarization is to identify what is new in a given document. We treat this as a novelty detection task by contrasting the document to a background corpus to see which
associations are emphasized more in the document.
(3) Natural language processing is trivial, making the
method language-independent. All processed documents are
split to sentences and tokens (words) based on punctuation
and whitespaces; numbers are removed, and the remaining
tokens are used as they are, without any further processing.
In this paper we focus on the sentence selection subtask
of document summarization. We do not address the issue
of arranging or processing the sentences for improved readability. We evaluate the method in English using public
benchmarks, and leave experiments with other languages
for future work. In the experiments, our proposed method
outperforms all unsupervised summarization methods that
do not use semantic resources such as Wordnet.
This paper is organised as follows. We next briefly review
related work. We then present the Association Mixture Text
Summarization method in Section 3. The performance of the
method is evaluated in Section 4, while Section 5 concludes
this article with a discussion.

In the age of big data, automatic methods for creating summaries of documents become increasingly important. In
this paper we propose a novel, unsupervised method for
(multi-)document summarization. In an unsupervised and
language-independent fashion, this approach relies on the
strength of word associations in the set of documents to be
summarized. The summaries are generated by picking sentences which cover the most specific word associations of
the document(s). We measure the performance on the DUC
2007 dataset. Our experiments indicate that the proposed
method is the best-performing unsupervised summarization
method in the state-of-the-art that makes no use of humancurated knowledge bases.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
I.2.7 [Natural Language Processing]: Language models—abstracting methods, summarization

Keywords
Multi-Document Summarization; Word Associations

1.

hannu.toivonen@cs.helsinki.fi

INTRODUCTION

We propose a novel method for document summarization,
Association Mixture Text Summarization, aimed to abstract
a news story into a shorter text. Like most other methods, Association Mixture Text Summarization works in a
sentence-based manner, selecting a set of sentences from the
document to be summarized to constitute its summary. The
sentences are chosen so that they collectively cover as much
of the relevant information in the original document as possible. The main difficulties are to define what is relevant
and to measure how well sets of sentences cover relevant
information. Our method has three central characteristics:
(1) Relevance is based on the relative associations between
words, helping to grasp the most salient information in a
news story. Much of the core content of news stories is in the

2.

RELATED WORK

Document summarization is a well-studied area. There
are two types of summarizations methods: methods which
select existing sentences and methods which generate sentences. Both of these types of methods can be either supervised or unsupervised, i.e., either learning from examples
of existing summaries or not. We focus on the unsupervised
domain, of which we give a very brief overview. Nenkova and
McKeown [10] provide an exhaustive review of the topic.
Some methods use Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) [2] as
their basis (e.g. [4]). The state-of-the art in purely unsupervised summarization is represented by the DSDR method of
He et al. [5]. This approach generates a summary by using sentences that best “reconstruct” the original document.
This work has been extended by Zhang et al. [11] who com-

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
SIGIR ’14, July 06 - 11 2014, Gold Coast , QLD, Australia
Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07 ...$15.00.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2609500

1023

bined document reconstruction and topic decomposition.
A number of unsupervised methods take advantage of additional linguistic resources. In particular, the Two-Tiered
Topic model by Celikyilmaz [1] uses Wordnet [9] and the
DUC-provided user query for selecting the summary sentences. The Document Understanding Conference1 (DUC)
provides most evaluation procedures and collections in the
summarization field. We provide further details in Section 4.

3.

third model is the Association Mixture model, while the first
two are simpler models that will be used as the components
of the mixture.
For convenience, we below define the models using parameters pi· (the probability of observing word ti ), p·j (the
probability of observing word tj ), and pij (the probability of
observing both ti and tj ). These give more natural definitions for the models. The multinomial model parameters can
then easily be obtained as pi−j = pi· − pij ; p−ij = p·j − pij ;
p−i−j = 1 − pij − pi−j − p−ij .
The independence model (component) pD-ind considers observed frequencies of words t1 and t2 only in document D and assumes that they are statistically independent:

METHOD

The Association Mixture Text Summarization method
proposed below takes as its input a document D to be summarized and a background corpus B consisting of a set of
documents representing the norm or the current state of information.
As a special case, the background corpus can be empty.
Additionally, by extension, instead of a single document a
set of documents can be summarized by simply giving their
concatenation as the input document D, as will be done in
the experimental section.
The method has two parts: (1) computation of documentspecific word associations, and (2) selection of sentences with
strong word associations. These two steps are described in
the following subsections.

3.1

pD-ind
= ni· /n;
i·

pD-ind
= ni· · n·j /n2 .
ij

If the data fits this model badly, i.e., essentially if nij deviates a lot from ni· · n·j /n, then the words are likely to be
statistically dependent.
The background model (component) pB estimates all
three parameters from the respective relative frequencies in
the background corpus B:
pB
i· = mi· /m;

pB
·j = m·j /m;

pB
ij = mij /m.

If the data fits this model badly then the word pair occurs in
the document differently from the background. This signals
that the association is novel.
The association mixture model pB+D-ind averages the
two components above, weighted by their sample sizes n
and m: pB+D-ind = (n · pD-ind + m · pB )/(n + m). This gives

Finding Document-Specific Associations

We consider two relevance criteria for associations in the
given document D.
First, an association between two words is more relevant
if they are statistically mutually dependent, i.e., if they cooccur in D more frequently than they would by chance.
This, of course, is a classic idea.
Second, and more interestingly, the association is characteristic for document D if the two words co-occur in D more
frequently than in the background corpus B.
The second criterion is in principle more useful since it
uses additional data to assess the association, but it is of
little value if the background corpus is small or if the words
or the word pair does not occur in the corpus. Our method
therefore uses a mixture model of the two criteria above.
Notation.
We first define the notation for various
counts of words and word pairs in document D and in background B. Let ti and tj be words. We use nij to denote
the number of sentences in document D that contain both
words ti and tj , ni−j the number of sentences containing
word ti but not tj , n−ij the number of sentences containing
tj but not ti , and n−i−j the number of sentences containing
neither ti nor tj . We use ni· = nij + ni−j to denote the total
number of sentences containg word ti , and respectively for
n·j . Let n = |D| denote the total number of sentences in
document D. Finally, let mij , mi−j , m−ij , m−i−j , mi· , m·j
and m be the respective counts in the background corpus B.
Statistical Model. Consider the association between
words ti and tj . We use multinomial distributions to
model the probabilities of observing different combinations
of existence/non-existence of words ti and tj in a sentence.
The four respective model parameters are pij , pi−j , p−ij
and p−i−j , affecting the likelihood of the observed counts
nij , ni−j , n−ij and n−i−j . Three such models are given
next, and the fit of the data to these models is later used to
assign a weight to the association between ti and tj . The
1

pD-ind
= n·j /n;
·j

pB+D-ind
i·

=

(ni· + mi· )/(n + m),

B+D-ind

=

(n·j + m·j )/(n + m),

B+D-ind

=

(ni· · n·j /n + mij )/(n + m).

p·j

pij

In other words, the mixture model combines information
from document D itself and from the background B. Their
relative weights adapt to their relative sizes, giving more
emphasis to the statistically more reliable source of information.
Association Weights. The weight of the association between two words is based on a log-likelihood ratio test [3].
The test compares two models for each word pair: (1) a
null model, in our case the mixture model, and (2) a maximum likelihood alternative model. If the likelihood of the
alternative model is much higher, then the null model is less
likely to be true. In other words, the mixture model is an
expression of expectations, and we are actually interested in
finding exceptions to them.
The maximum likelihood model pD is obtained by simply
assigning the model parameters directly from the observed
D
D
relative frequencies: pD
i· = ni· /n; p·j = n·j /n; pij = nij /n.
D
Let L(p ) be the likelihood of the maximum likelihood
model given the counts nij , ni−j , n−ij , n−i−j in document D, and let L(pB+D-ind ) be the likelihood of the mixture model given the same counts. We define the weight
w(ti , tj ) of the association between ti and tj as the value of
the respective log-likelihood ratio test:
w(ti , tj ) = −2 log

http://duc.nist.gov/

L(pB+D-ind )
.
L(pD )

Multinomial coefficients in the likelihoods cancel out, and

1024

4.1

after simplification we have
X
B+D-ind
w(ti , tj ) = 2
na (log pD
).
a − log pa

For experiments and comparisons we use the DUC 2007
dataset consisting of 45 topics. Each topic of 25 documents
from the AQUAINT corpus of English news is to be summarized into a collective abstract of at most 250 words.
The evaluation measure is the well-known ROUGE
(Recall-Oriented Understudy for Gisting Evaluation) [8].
We use the model summaries of the DUC datasets and their
associated tools to compute the ROUGE measures. According to Lin and Hovy [7] the ROUGE-1 score has the best
correspondence with human judgements. It is therefore the
main focus of our evaluation. We experimented with several background corpora: the Brown corpus, the Gütenberg
corpus, the Reuters RCV-1 corpus, as well as combinations.
Data Preprocessing. We remove all markup tags from
the documents and leave only the headline and textual content of the news story. We then split the content to sentences
with the DUC 2003 sentence segmentation tool and keep all
words of length at least two.
Comparative Evaluation. We compare the Association Mixture Text Summarization method against results
given in literature for state-of-the-art unsupervised summarization methods: Document Summarization Based on Data
Reconstruction, linear and non-linear (DSDR-lin, DSDRnon) [5], Topic DSDR (TDSRD) [11], Two-Tiered Topic
Model (TTM) and Enriched TTM (ETTM) [1]. The last two
use Wordnet and topic description as additional resources.
We also include two baseline methods provided with the
DUC: NIST BL and CLASSY04. The latter is actually a
supervised method.

a∈{“ij”,“i−j”,
“−ij”,“−i−j”}

The log-likelihood ratio test gives lower weights for word
pairs that better match the mixture model and higher
weights for those associations that are unexpected with respect to the mixture model. In text summarization, we are
interested in word pairs that have a higher relative frequency
in the document D than in the background B, and that have
a high log-likelihood ratio.

3.2

Sentence Selection

The other subtask is to select from document D sentences
that contain strong word associations. In the sentence selection phase, our goal is to preserve as many of the stronger
associations and thereby as much as possible of the core
contents of the original document D.
Given a fixed target size of the summary (e.g. 250 words)
and the association weights, we aim to pick sentences such
that the sum of the log-likelihood ratios of word pairs in the
summary is maximized. To avoid selecting sentences with
too similar content, each pair is taken into account once.
Formally, let document D be a set of sentences and let
each sentence be a set of words. We call any subset S =
{s01 , . . . , s0s } ⊂ D of sentences a summary of D. We define
the total weight of associations in summary S as
X
w(S) =
w(ti , tj ),
{ti ,tj } s.t. ti 6=tj ∧
∃s∈S: {ti ,tj }⊂s

4.2

i.e., as a sum over the set of word pairs in any sentence of
the summary. Every pair is only counted once.
In the sentence selection step we aim to find a summary
S ∗ ⊂ D with a maximal total weight, i.e.,

Results

Association Mixture Model and Its Two Components: In terms of F-measure for ROUGE-1, Figure 1 illustrates the performance of the overall model and the independence and background corpus components as functions
of the size of the background corpus B.
The performance improves from 0.380 to 0.422 as the size
of the background B grows from 10 to 10,000 sentences. This
illustrates how a larger background corpus is a simple but
effective way to provide auxiliary information to the summarization process. In our experiments, 1,000–3,000 sentences
were already sufficient as a background corpus. The improvement after this was very limited.
Next, consider the performance of the two components of
the model individually. The independence component does
obviously not depend on the background corpus B and is
hence represented by a horizontal line on the figure.
The background component, in turn, shows a longer period of improvement than the Association Mixture model
and converges later than the 1,000–3,000 sentences range.
Overall, the Association Mixture Text Summarization
method seems to successfully combine the two components
into a model that clearly dominates both of them. Contrary
to our expectations, there is a clear margin over the background component for large background corpus sizes, even
though the relative weight of the independence component
is very small there.
Comparison to Other Methods. A comparison to
state-of-the-art in unsupervised summarization methods
shows that the Association Mixture model is very competitive (Table 1). ROUGE-1 results are additionally shown as
thin, unlabeled horizontal lines in Figure 1.

S ∗ = arg max w(S),
S⊂D
||S||≤L

where ||S|| is the number of words in summary S. In our
experiments below, the upper limit is set to L = 250 words.
This problem is similar to the weighted set cover problem [6]: use sentences of the document to cover as much of
the associations as possible. Due to the limited length of
the summary, a natural “cost” of a sentence is the number
of words in it. Given the computational complexity of the
task, we resort to a greedy algorithm [6] to find a summary
S that approximates the optimum S ∗ .
For the sake of simplicity, in the experiments below we
add sentences to the summary S until the maximum size is
reached (||S|| ≥ L) and then simply truncate the summary
to L words.

4.

Experimental Setup

EXPERIMENTS

In this section, we describe experiments carried out to
evaluate the proposed Association Mixture Text Summarization method. We aim to address the following questions:
(1) How does the method perform in comparison to stateof-the-art unsupervised summarization methods? (2) What
are the contributions of the components pB and pD-ind to the
method? (3) What is the effect of the size of the background
corpus B on the quality of the summaries?

1025

1026

