On User Interactions with Query Auto-Completion
Bhaskar Mitra, Milad Shokouhi, Filip Radlinski, Katja Hofmann
Microsoft
Cambridge, UK

{bmitra, milads, filiprad, katja.hofmann}@microsoft.com

ABSTRACT

large commercial search engine, to identify conditions under which
users are more likely to engage with a QAC system.
Query logs capture the interactions of users with search systems
and provide valuable insights about how users search. Therefore,
perhaps it is not surprising that query logs have been studied extensively to model user interactions with different components of
search engines, such as search results [8], vertical results [1], ads [4]
and related searches [2]. In this paper, we present the first large-scale
query-log analysis on QAC.
In the first part of our analysis, we investigate how QAC usage
varies with suggestion position and the topical class of a user’s
intent. In the second part, we focus on differences in QAC usage
with respect to various attributes of the partial query already typed –
typically referred to as query prefix – at the point of engagement .

Query Auto-Completion (QAC) is a popular feature of web search
engines that aims to assist users to formulate queries faster and avoid
spelling mistakes by presenting them with possible completions as
soon as they start typing. However, despite the wide adoption of
auto-completion in search systems, there is little published on how
users interact with such services.
In this paper, we present the first large-scale study of user interactions with auto-completion based on query logs of Bing, a
commercial search engine. Our results confirm that lower-ranked
auto-completion suggestions receive substantially lower engagement than those ranked higher. We also observe that users are most
likely to engage with auto-completion after typing about half of the
query, and in particular at word boundaries. Interestingly, we also
noticed that the likelihood of using auto-completion varies with the
distance of query characters on the keyboard.
Overall, we believe that the results reported in our study provide
valuable insights for understanding user engagement with autocompletion, and are likely to inform the design of more effective
QAC systems.

2.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: H.3.3 Information Search
and Retrieval

Keywords: Query suggestions, auto completion
1. INTRODUCTION
Most modern search engines implement some form of Query
Auto-Completion (QAC), where users are shown possible completions for their query from the moment they type the first character.
This sort of system is assumed to make it easier for users to enter
effective search queries, in particular by avoiding common mistakes
such as misspellings and using particularly ambiguous queries.
However, the details of user’s interactions with QAC systems are
poorly understood. In this paper we study some of the latent factors
besides query suggestion quality that influence user engagement
with QAC systems. Specifically, we analyze the logs from Bing, a

QAC systems produce a list of suggested queries given a prefix
usually using exact-prefix matching. The ranking order of suggestions is typically static, and based on past query frequency [3, 5].
However, recent work has also considered ordering suggestions by
predicted future query popularity [12] or personalizing QAC to the
specific users [3, 11, 13]. Beyond the standard desktop interface,
Kamvar and Baluja [9] reported that auto-completion on mobile
devices could save users from typing up to 46% of their query
characters.
However, there have been few studies on understanding user interaction with QAC. Seeking to model user behavior, Kharitonov et al.
[10] proposed a model of users as interacting with QAC suggestions
from top to bottom, looking for a specific suggestion they have in
mind. However, this does not address the question of when during
query formulation the users will actually choose to do this. In terms
of ranking quality, the only previous work that directly measures the
effect of changes to QAC was a user study involving an enterprise
search system [7]. The authors find that improving auto-completion
by adding faceted-navigation features significantly reduces search
time when users look for known items. Again, the question of when
precisely this interaction happens is not addressed.

3.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request
permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR ’14 , July 06 - 11 2014, Gold Coast , QLD, Australia
Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07 ...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2609508

RELATED WORK

ANALYSIS

We sampled approximately 1.6 million queries from Bing’s search
query log for the first week of February 2014. To model the user
goal, we follow previous work on QAC [3, 11] and assume that the
submitted query is the target query the user wanted to formulate.
We note that while the actual QAC suggestions likely influence the
submitted query, in our analysis we did not consider the degree to
which ranking quality affected the user’s choice to interact with the
QAC system. Also, the only form of engagement with QAC that we
consider involves the user submitting a query proposed by the QAC

1055

6

7

8

Rank of Suggestion

Segment

Figure 1: The distribution of QAC engagement by rank of the
suggestions. Due to proprietary nature of the dataset, the numbers are normalized with respect to the first position and others
rescaled proportionally.

Figure 2: The relationship between query class (of the final issued query) and probability of engagement with QAC. We see
that a user’s is likelihood of engaging with QAC varies substantially with query class. As before, we only present the ratio of
the probability of QAC engagement per segment to the average
overall probability.

system. In particular, this ignores other forms of potential QAC
usage – such as users simply observing the suggestions and copying
the correct spelling of query terms during query formulation.
We start by investigating the overall usage patterns of QAC based
on suggestion positions and types of intent. We then focus on usage
differences with respect to specific attributes of the query prefix.

3.1

U
Im r l
ic ag
tio e
n
Fi ary
na
nc
e

5

D

4

ve
r
H all
ow
T
Au o
to
Lo s
ca
N
av Vi l
d
ig
at eo
i
C ona
el l
eb
rit
y

3

O

2

0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0

Rel. P(Engagement)

0.8
0.4
0.0

Rel. Engagement

1

explain the higher than average engagement with QAC in these
segments.

3.2

QAC usage by type and rank

QAC usage by prefix attributes

Word boundaries. Given that a user engages with QAC, when
will this occur? We now ask if there is more or less user engagement
with QAC at different parts of the query. Figure 3 shows that within
a word the highest user engagement with QAC suggestions happens
after the user has typed the first 3 characters, and that it decreases
with further increase in the number of characters typed for the
current word. While the relative frequency of words of different
lengths in the search logs may partially explain this pattern, we
observe the same pattern of decreasing engagement with decreasing
distance from the end of the word in Figure 4 in the range where 4
to 1 characters in the word remain to be typed. We hypothesize that
this indicates that the closer the user is to typing the full word, the
less likely he/she is to engage with QAC for completing the word.
Interestingly, we also note the apparent bursty nature of typing at the
very beginning of each word, where users are less likely to engage
with QAC after typing just the first or the second characters of a
word. We hypothesize that once users start typing a word, they often
type the first three characters in a semi-automatic fashion.
The user preferences also become obvious when we look at the
engagement with respect to distance from the end of a word. As
shown in Figure 4, about 38% of QAC engagements happen after
the user has typed the last character of a word and an additional
almost 15% of engagement happens after the user typed the space
character immediately following a word. In other words, at this
point they are most likely to select the completion of their query in
terms of just selecting additional words to be appended to what they
have typed so far.

Suggestion rank. Figure 1 shows the distribution of QAC engagement by suggestion rank. Given the proprietary nature of the
Bing’s dataset, we do not report the absolute probabilities of QAC
engagement in this paper and instead show the ratio between the
probability of QAC engagement for each position and the first position.
We see a clear decrease in engagement with lower ranks of QAC
suggestions. This dramatic rank effect (with the second position
receiving less than 40% of the engagement of the top suggestion)
may be caused by the lower-ranked suggestions being less relevant,
or by strong position bias, with users assuming that top-ranked
suggestions are better. Previous work has found that in the case of
Web search users often select the top result when a target result is
hard to find [6]. The relative contribution of these two factors in
QAC remains to be determined.
Intent type. Does QAC engagement vary based on the type or
topical category of the query? To answer this question we ran a
set of available in-house trained query classifiers on the submitted
queries and computed the probability of QAC engagement for each
segment corresponding to each classifier. As before, we report only
the relative ratio (and not the absolute values) of the probability
of QAC engagement for each segment to the overall probability of
QAC engagement across all queries.
Our data shows that QAC engagement varies with query class.
For instance, there is a higher probability of QAC engagement for
How-To, Local and Navigational queries, and lesser than average
for query segments such as finance. We hypothesize that for popular
queries, such as navigational and famous celebrities, the search
engine is more likely to return relevant suggestions. This may

Fraction of query typed. What fraction of the query do users
generally type before engaging with QAC suggestions? Based on
our analysis, QAC engagement most frequently happens after the
user has typed slightly more than 50% of the query, as shown in

1056

15
10

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10

0

1

−
0. 0.
1 1
−
0. 0.
2 2
−
0. 0.
3 3
−
0. 0.
4 4
−
0. 0.
5 5
−
0. 0.
6 6
−
0. 0.
7 7
−
0. 0.
8 8
−
0. 0.
9 9
−
1.
0
=
1

0

5

% Engagement

12
8
4
0

% Engagement

S

Character Position from Start of Word

P(Engagement)
8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

S

Character Position from End of Word

0.000

10
0
10 9

0.006

Figure 5: Fraction of the query that is typed by the user before
engaging with QAC.

25

Figure 3: Percentage of engagement with QAC based on the
number of characters typed in the current word. “S” denotes
the character that separates the current word from the previous.

% Engagement

Fraction of Query Typed

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Keyboard Distance

Figure 4: Percentage of engagement with QAC based on the
number of characters that have not yet been typed in the current word. “S” denotes the character that separates the current
word from the next.

Figure 6: Effect on keyboard distance between the last character typed and the next character that the user would have had
to type had they not engaged with QAC on user engagement.

Figure 6 shows a monotonic increase in the probability of engagement with keyboard distance up to a distance of 4 keys. The 4
keys distance is interesting as it is the maximum distance a user’s
finger must travel while typing on a QWERTY keyboard1 assuming
the use of two hands and that each hand covers half the layout area
of the keyboard. This means that even though for the pair {a,p}
the keyboard distance according to our definition is 9, the actual
distance any individual finger of the user needs to travel will be less
than 9 as the user will most likely employ fingers on different hands
to reach the two keys. We believe that a more sophisticated model
taking into consideration the use of two hands could show a clearer
relationship between QAC engagement and keyboard distance.

Figure 5. Interestingly there is also a substantial number of instances
where the user typed the full query but decided to use QAC for
submission instead of pressing the return key or clicking the search
button.

Keyboard distance. Does the distance the finger needs to travel
for the next keystroke influence QAC engagement? To test this
hypothesis, we considered all pairs of keystrokes where the first
key corresponds to the last character of the prefix already typed
by the user at the point of engagement with QAC and the second
key corresponds to what would have been the next character based
on the submitted query. We restricted our analysis to only pairs of
characters where both were in the English alphabet for simplicity.
We then computed a keyboard distance between any two given keys
based on the minimum number of adjacent keys that the finger
must travel over to reach one from the other assuming a QWERTY
keyboard layout. For example the keyboard distance for the {a,s}
pair is 1 and {a,c} is 3 (based on the path a→s→d→c) by this
definition.

Distance from rarest n-gram. We now ask whether users are
more likely to engage with QAC when attempting to type words that
are difficult to spell. For this analysis we used the rarity of character
n-grams as a proxy metric for spelling difficulty, assuming that ngrams that are rare in queries correspond to words that are difficult
1

1057

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/QWERTY

6
4
2
−10

−7

−4

−1

1

3

5

7

CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we investigated user interaction patterns with QAC
in Bing. We analyzed auto-completion usage with respect to different attributes of the partial query already typed by the user before
engaging with QAC. Our results suggested that users are most likely
to engage with auto-completion at word boundaries, when typing
rare n-grams, and after typing half of their query characters. We
also observed a clear relation between the position of the next character on the keyboard and the likelihood of auto-completion usage.
Overall, these results appear to confirm typical intuitions of when
users would engage with QAC.
We believe that our results provide valuable insights about how
auto-completion is perceived by users. For instance, they suggest
that QAC is particularly useful for words that are difficult to spell,
and also that engagement with QAC varies with the segment type of
the target query. Additionally, the particularly strong engagement
at high positions suggests that showing users more suggestions is
unlikely to increase engagement, and that ranking the best queries
at the top position is critical.

0

% Engagement

4.

9

Distance from Rarest 3−gram
Figure 7: Probability that the user will engage with QAC based
on the number of characters they have typed relative to the
most difficult to spell section in the word as determined by the
position of the rarest 3-gram in the selected query.

References

4

6

[2] R. Baeza-Yates, C. Hurtado, and M. Mendoza. Query
recommendation using query logs in search engines. In Proc.
EDBT, pages 588–596, Heraklion, Greece, 2004.

2

[3] Z. Bar-Yossef and N. Kraus. Context-sensitive query
auto-completion. In Proc. WWW, pages 107–116, 2011.
[4] M. Ciaramita, V. Murdock, and V. Plachouras. Online
learning from click data for sponsored search. In Proc. WWW,
pages 227–236, Beijing, China, 2008.

0

% Engagement

[1] J. Arguello, F. Diaz, and J. Callan. Learning to aggregate
vertical results into web search results. In Proc. CIKM, pages
201–210, Glasgow, UK, 2011.

−10

−7

−4

−1

1

3

5

7

9

[5] K. Grabski and T. Scheffer. Sentence completion. In Proc.
SIGIR, pages 433–439, 2004.

Distance from Rarest 4−gram

[6] Z. Guan and E. Cutrell. An eye tracking study of the effect of
target rank on web search. In Proc. CHI, pages 417–420,
2007.

Figure 8: Probability that the user will engage with QAC based
on the number of characters they have typed relative to the
most difficult to spell section in the word as determined by the
position of the rarest 4-gram in the selected query.

[7] D. Hawking and K. Griffiths. An enterprise search paradigm
based on extended query auto-completion. do we still need
search and navigation? In Proc. ADCS, 2013.
[8] T. Joachims, L. Granka, B. Pan, H. Hembrooke, and G. Gay.
Accurately interpreting clickthrough data as implicit feedback.
In Proc. SIGIR, pages 154–161, 2005.

to spell. We computed a frequency histogram of all character ngrams of length 3 and 4 based on two years of query logs from Bing.
We restricted our n-grams to only those containing characters in
the English alphabet. Then, for a given query for which QAC was
engaged with, we compute a distance in characters between where
the user stopped typing to engage with QAC and the first character
of the rarest n-gram in the query. For example, if the user stopped
typing after the first character of the rarest n-gram then the distance
is 0, and if after the second then 1, and so on.
Figures 7 and 8 show that the highest percentage of QAC engagement correspond to when the user has typed the 3rd character of the
rarest tri-gram or the 4-gram in the query. Also there is a steeper
decline in percentage of engagement at positions after this point
compared to earlier positions. This appears to suggest that users do
seem to engage more with QAC leading up to the rarest n-gram,
which is likely to be the point at which it becomes clear if the user
does or does not know how to spell the word correctly.

[9] M. Kamvar and S. Baluja. The role of context in query input:
Using contextual signals to complete queries on mobile
devices. In Proc. MobileHCI, pages 405–412, Singapore,
2007.
[10] E. Kharitonov, C. MacDonald, P. Serdyukov, and I. Ounis.
User Model-based Metrics for Offline Query Suggestion
Evaluation. In Proc. SIGIR, 2013.
[11] M. Shokouhi. Learning to personalize query auto-completion.
In Proc. SIGIR, pages 103–112, 2013.
[12] M. Shokouhi and K. Radinsky. Time-sensitive query
auto-completion. In Proc. SIGIR, pages 601–610, 2012.
[13] I. Weber and C. Castillo. The demographics of web search. In
Proc. SIGIR, pages 523–530, 2010.

1058

