Effects of Task and Domain on Searcher Attention
Dmitry Lagun

Eugene Agichtein

Emory University

Emory University

dlagun@emory.edu

eugene@mathcs.emory.edu

ABSTRACT

with the search system. In this paper we use eye tracking technology to gain a better understanding of user’s experience with search systems in different domains, and for
varying information needs. In addition to search interface
usability, we analyze typical user attention on a computer
screen, that summarize patterns of search interface usage
by highlighting regions of the screen that users frequently
attend.
Previous work [1, 5, 7] studied how users examine web
search results. Researchers discovered “golden triangle” pattern found in examination of web search results. While a
lot of focus was devoted to the Web Search setting, attention during search in other domains remained relatively unexplored. Such search interfaces are substantially different
from the ordinary web search interface. For example, search
interface used by the Twitter service allows its users to explore many more search results beyond top ten results offered by the web search engines. Hence, the findings that
were reported in Web Search domain may no longer apply to a domain specific search system. In this paper, we
study user examination behavior across four different domains: Web Search (Google), News (CNN), Social Network
(Twitter) and Shopping (Amazon). In addition to the domain, we vary the scope of the information need by distinguishing search tasks with Focused and Broad information
need, as described in Section 3. We investigate the following research question (RQ). What are the typical patterns
of attention during search, for different domains? We address the RQ by analyzing gaze metrics which are often
used to assess cognitive load [4, 6] experienced by the users
and amount of visual searching they perform [4, 9] using a
particular search interface. We further investigate RQ by
studying aggregated attention distribution in each domain
(Section 4.2).

Previous studies of online user attention during information seeking tasks have mainly focused on analyzing searcher
behavior in the web search settings. While these studies
enabled better understanding of search result examination,
their findings might not generalize for the tasks and search
interfaces in other domains such as Shopping or Social Media. In this paper we present, to best of our knowledge, the
first cross-domain comparison of search examination behavior and patterns of aggregated attention across Web Search,
News, Shopping and Social Network domains. We investigate how domain of the search and the scope of the information need affect search examination, and find significant
differences beyond those arising from natural disparities between individuals. For example, we find that the mean fixation duration, a common indicator of cognitive load, varies
significantly across domains (e.g., mean fixation duration
in the Social Network domain exceeds that of general Web
Search by over 30%). We also find large differences in the
aggregate patterns of user attention on the screen, especially
in the Shopping and Social Network domains compared to
the Web Search domain, emphasizing the need for domain
specific user models and evaluation metrics.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Systems]: Information Storage and
Retrieval

Keywords
Search result examination; user attention patterns; searcher
behavior.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Success of any search system is largely determined by how
well the system addresses information needs of its users.
Hence, understanding of typical searcher behavior becomes
imperative and instrumental for improving user experience

2.

RELATED WORK

The related work focuses on eye tracking studies of web
page usability and search result examination behavior.
Research on usability of web page design and interfaces
has long relied on the eye tracking as a evaluation tool [9, 4,
7, 1, 2]. Eye movements recorded during evaluation sessions
have been used to evaluate user interfaces on different dimensions including cognitive load [9, 4], searching efficiency
[2, 4], meaningfulness of cues [4, 9] and effectiveness of page
layout [9]. Early study of Goldberg et al.[4] was one of the
first to use eye movement data for evaluation of a search
engine interface. In their study they found that users are
biased to examine the search page either horizontally or ver-

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR’14, July 6–11, 2014, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07 ...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2609516.

1087

Figure 1: Effect of domain and task factors on gaze metrics.

tically. Pan et al. [8] analyzed effects of page domain, page
order, task and user gender on gaze examination behavior
during a web page browsing. They experimented with four
different page domains: Shopping, Search, News and Business. Our study is similar in the spirit to study of Pan et al.,
there are, however, important distinctions. First, we collect
our data in a natural settings – instead of asking users to
simply view the screenshot of a search page (as in [8]), we
let users naturally interact with search interface, including
issuing queries, clicking and navigating to other pages. Second, besides analyzing effects of search task and domain on
cognitive load, we investigate differences of aggregate attention caused by task and domain factors. Third, as of today,
study of Pan et al. dates almost ten years, whereas search
engines (and user’s habits) have significantly evolved during
this time warranting revision of the topic.
In web search, Granka et al. [5] studied examination behavior of search results. Their finding on “top-to-bottom”
result examination behavior laid the ground for numerous
user models and inspired idea of position discount in retrieval evaluation metrics. One year later, Aula et al. [1]
investigated individual differences in search result examination and identified two common patterns of result examination - exhaustive and economic examiners. They found
significant correlation between mean fixation duration type
pattern of examination (economic examiners had shorter fixation duration). Lorigo et al. [7] quantified distribution of
user attention in Web Search domain and identified famous
“F-shaped” pattern. In this study we extend the prior work
by analyzing effect of search domain and task on gaze examination behavior. In addition, we quantify aggregate attention distribution in Web Search, News, Shopping and Social
Network domains.

3.

ing about gay marriage” in the Social Network domain. In
order to capture natural user behavior we designed the tasks
to reflect typical information needs encountered in a particular domain. While during the user study we collected user
interaction data on both search result and landing pages,
in this paper we analyze user behavior only on the search
result pages (not the landing pages).
We recruited 20 users (11 males) using university bulletin
board. Each user was asked to perform four practice tasks to
become familiar with the study flow, followed by the 16 tasks
that we use in our analysis. Among the 16 tasks, each user
performed four tasks in each of the four domains, i.e. two
tasks per each (domain, scope) condition. We randomized
presentation order of the tasks to eliminate possible learning
effects. In order to eliminate possible confounding factors we
balanced the study design by ensuring the same amount of
data to be collected for each (domain, scope) pair.
To capture user’s eye movements we used Tobii T60 eye
tracker system built into a 17“ monitor with 1280×1024
screen resolution and allowing us to record eye movement
with frequency of 60 Hz. The eye movement data was processed using Tobii Studio software to obtain fixations and
saccades. All user actions, including query input, page navigation, clicks and mouse cursor movements were recorded
using custom extension to the Firefox internet browser. Overall, we collected eye movement and interactions data for 2890
page views, with 673 page views corresponding to the search
pages. Specifically, we obtained data for 112 Web Search,
175 Social Network, 177 Shopping and 192 News page views.

4.

RESULTS

We analyze the differences in user attention caused by domain and task factors from two different perspectives. First,
we analyze how domain and task affect usability of search interface measured with standard eye tracking metrics. Then,
we analyze differences in distribution of user attention on
the screen for different domains.

USER STUDY

In order to investigate our research questions we designed
and conducted an eye tracking user study, in which we systematically varied scope of the search task and the search
domain. We experimented with two types of information
need (scope) – Focused and Broad and four different search
domains: Web Search (Google), Shopping (Amazon), Social
Network (Twitter) and News (CNN). Focused information
need required users to find some specific information, e.g.
“How many megapixels does Nexus 5 camera have?” in Web
Search domain, while Broad information need had no specific answer and required users to read on or learn about a
particular topic, e.g. “Learn what people on Twitter are say-

4.1

Effect on Gaze Metrics

We adopt standard eye movement metrics to quantify differences in eye movement behavior due to domain and task
factors. In this paper we focus on the following metrics: fixation duration, fixation spatial density, saccade amplitude
and saccade rate. These metric are important as they quantify cognitive load and amount of searching experienced by
the users [3, 2, 9].

1088

(a) Web Search domain

(b) News domain

(c) Social Network domain

(d) Shopping domain

Figure 2: User attention heatmaps aggregated for all searches in each domain. Color indicates time spent on viewing a
particualr region of the screen (red color indicates larger amount of time, blue color indicates smaller amount of time).

Fixation Duration is by far the most common eye movement metric. It is commonly thought that most of the visual information acquired by humans is processed during
the fixation [6]. A longer fixation duration may indicate difficulty in extracting information, or it may mean that the
page content is more engaging [6]. Figure 1a shows mean
fixation duration for each domain and task (whiskers indicate standard error of the mean). We performed the twoway repeated measured ANOVA, which revealed significant
main effect for the domain factor (F(4,624)=7.04, p<0.001).
The effects of task factor and the interaction were not found
statistically significant (F(1,624)=0.188, p=0.665). We find
that mean fixation duration varies significantly across domains, e.g. fixation duration increases on 30% from 288±13
ms in Search domain to 375±22 ms in Social Network. The
latter fact suggests that users experience higher cognitive
load when searching in Social Network, which is likely due
complex nature of Twitter search results that include text,
images and are less standardized compared to Google’s interface. Another reason for larger fixation duration in Twitter search can possibly be due to improper, sometimes purposefully misspelled or abbreviated language used in many
Twitter posts, making Twitter results more difficult to read,
compared to the typical web search results.
Fixation Spatial Density was used to quantify locality of
visual searching [3, 2]. As in the prior work [3, 2] in order to
compute fixation spatial density we divide screen area using
uniform grid of 10 x 10. Using the grid we calculate number
of fixations falling to each of squares of the grid. The fixation
spatial density is then defined as number of grid squares
having one fixations or more, divided on total number of
squares in the grid. Low fixation spatial density indicates
focused and efficient searching, while relatively high fixation
spatial density corresponds to evenly spread fixations and
reflects widespread and inefficient searching [3].
Figure 1b shows mean fixation density for the experimental conditions. The two-way ANOVA revealed significant
main effect for the domain factor (F(4,624)=9.553, p<0.001)
and the task factor (F(1,624)=9.658, p<0.002). Interaction
between the factors was not found significant to have significant effect (F(1,624)=2.307, p=0.056). As illustrated in
Figure 1b, for most domains, fixation spatial density decreases in Broad tasks compared to Focused tasks.
Saccade Amplitude allows us to measure extent of visual
searching performed by the users. While no information is
being encoded during saccades [6], saccades metrics are crucial for understanding of global nature of the eye movements

on the page. Saccade amplitude is computed as Euclidean
distance between saccade starting and end points. Larger
saccade amplitudes represent moments when user’s attention shifts from a current point of examination to a distant
page region.
Figure 1c shows mean saccade amplitude for each experimental condition. The two-way ANOVA revealed significant main effect for the domain factor (F(4,624)=14.526,
p<0.001); the task factor was not found to have significant
effect on saccade amplitude (F(1,624)=0.528, p=0.468). We
observed large variation of saccade amplitude across the domains, ranging from 149±15 px in Web Search domain to
196±5 px in Shopping domain. We think this difference can
be explained by the availability of faceted search functionality (in Shopping domain), which was quite popular among
the user study participants as we describe in Section 4.2.
Saccade Rate indicates frequency of context switching by
a user and provides another dimension to quantify efficiency
of visual searching [4, 3]. Saccade rate is measured as total number of saccades divided by the time spent on a web
page in seconds. Figure 1d shows mean saccade rate for the
experimental conditions. The two-way ANOVA revealed significant main effect for the domain factor (F(4,624)=6.167,
p<0.001). The task and interaction effect were not found
to have significant effect on saccade rate (F(4,624)=2.173,
p=0.07). Consistent with our results on fixation duration,
we find that in Search domain participants exhibited larger
saccade rate, compared to Social Network domains.
To summarize, our findings show that search domain and
scope significantly affect common eye tracking metrics related to cognitive load and visual search efficiency.

4.2

Effect on Attention Distribution

In this section we analyze aggregate patterns of user attention on the screen in each domain. Figure 2 shows attention
aggregated for all search in each domain. In each heatmap
the color indicates amount of the time user spent viewing a
particular region of the screen (red color corresponds to large
amount of time). As our goal is to analyze typical examination patterns in each domain, we overlay heatmaps with
a typical search page screenshot in the domain. However,
since we plot aggregate attention, that is, from all searches,
the overlaid page screenshot might not represent all pages in
the domain, e.g., in Web Search, the advertisement on the
right hand side or Knowledge Graph results may be present
in some searches. Nonetheless, the heatmaps seem to align
well with typical search page layout for most of the domains.

1089

5.

Next to each heatmap we plot the marginal distribution of
user’s attention on x and y dimensions.
Figure 2a shows typical pattern of user attention in Web
Search domain. Similar pattern was previously reported by
several studies (e.g., [7]) and was termed as “F-shape” or
“golden triangle” due to the specific shape of attention distribution that decays on both x and y directions and resembles triangle. The decay in viewing along y direction is often
referred to as position bias in result examination (higher results receive more attention because of the higher position
and not necessarily higher relevance). While we clearly observe position bias on y direction, the rate of attention decay
on x is arguably even more pronounced in our data, suggesting that users do not often read the entire line of text from
left to right, but rather examine several words in the beginning of the result title. The latter fact was not emphasized
in prior research.
Figure 2b shows attention distribution for the News domain. Compared to the Web Search, the News domain has
significantly more sponsored search results. One large block
of sponsored search results is positioned on top of the organic results and another one is displayed on the right side
of the page. Upon issuing the query, users not familiar with
page layout in this domain seemed to be attracted by the
sponsored search results, spending significant time on them
(before realizing that the organic results are located closer
to the center of the page). We observe the familiar triangular pattern of attention positioned next to the first organic
search result. The attention decays more rapidly on x and y
dimensions than in the Web Search domain. Due to absence
of commercial intent in user study tasks participants spent
very little viewing advertisements on the right side.
In the Social Network domain (Figure 2c) we find that user
attention distribution is very different from Web Search and
News domains. On the vertical dimension most of the attention is concentrated slightly below the center of the screen.
The probability mass is also shifted along x direction – users
mostly focus on Twitter posts appearing in the right half of
the screen. We think this might be due to several reasons.
The first is heterogeneity of Twitter search results, which are
often comprised from most relevant user profiles (displayed
at top of the page) and most relevant Twitter posts (displayed towards the bottom of the first screen). The second
is that participants preferred to keep their sight position relatively constant, and scroll down the page to retrieve more
results from the stream spending most of their time viewing
posts in the bottom half of the screen.
Figure 2d shows the distribution of attention in the Shopping domain. In contrast to other domains where attention
is concentrated on main page content on x axis, in Shopping
domain we find more uniform distribution across the horizontal and vertical dimensions. Remarkably, participants
spent significant amounts of time on the faceted search feature of the search interface (signified with hottest spot on
the Figure 2d).
To summarize, our findings show the differences in the
typical patterns of attention distribution during information
search in different domains. These differences are caused by
variation in web page layout and structure, which underlines
a need for better understanding of the interplay between
search task, domain and user attention, and the design of a
search interface.

CONCLUSIONS

Our initial analysis of user attention on search interfaces
in different domains emphasizes the ever growing need for
better understanding of the interplay between search task,
domain and user attention, and the design of a search interface. Our study is the first to compare search result examination behavior across different domains and information
needs. The findings provide important empirical evidence
of attention variability across search interfaces, and underline the need for more appropriate search interface specific
user models and search engine evaluation metrics to better
reflect user experience with the search system.

6.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by the National Science Foundation grant IIS-1018321 and the National Institute of Health
grant R01EB014266.

7.

REFERENCES

[1] A. Aula, P. Majaranta, and K.-J. Räihä. Eye-tracking
reveals the personal styles for search result evaluation.
In Human-Computer Interaction-INTERACT 2005.
Springer, 2005.
[2] L. Cowen, L. J. Ball, and J. Delin. An eye movement
analysis of web page usability. In People and Computers
XVI-Memorable Yet Invisible. Springer, 2002.
[3] J. H. Goldberg and X. P. Kotval. Computer interface
evaluation using eye movements: methods and
constructs. International Journal of Industrial
Ergonomics, 1999.
[4] J. H. Goldberg, M. J. Stimson, M. Lewenstein,
N. Scott, and A. M. Wichansky. Eye tracking in web
search tasks: design implications. In Proceedings of the
2002 symposium on Eye tracking research &
applications. ACM, 2002.
[5] L. A. Granka, T. Joachims, and G. Gay. Eye-tracking
analysis of user behavior in WWW search. In
Proceedings of the 27th annual international ACM
SIGIR conference on Research and development in
information retrieval. ACM, 2004.
[6] M. A. Just and P. A. Carpenter. A theory of reading:
From eye fixations to comprehension. Psychological
review, 1980.
[7] L. Lorigo, M. Haridasan, H. Brynjarsdóttir, L. Xia,
T. Joachims, G. Gay, L. Granka, F. Pellacini, and
B. Pan. Eye tracking and online search: Lessons
learned and challenges ahead. Journal of the American
Society for Information Science and Technology, 2008.
[8] B. Pan, H. A. Hembrooke, G. K. Gay, L. A. Granka,
M. K. Feusner, and J. K. Newman. The determinants
of web page viewing behavior: an eye-tracking study. In
Proceedings of the 2004 symposium on Eye tracking
research & applications. ACM, 2004.
[9] A. Poole and L. J. Ball. Eye tracking in hci and
usability research. Encyclopedia of Human-Computer
Interaction, 2006.

1090

