Exploiting Twitter and Wikipedia for
the Annotation of Event Images
Philip J. McParlane

∗

Joemon M. Jose

School of Computing Science
University of Glasgow (UK)
p.mcparlane.1@research.gla.ac.uk

School of Computing Science
University of Glasgow (UK)
Joemon.Jose@glasgow.ac.uk

ABSTRACT

to share them online using the same device, thus increasing the amount of visual content uploaded to image sharing
websites such as Flickr1 . Of this content, an ever increasing
number of users are uploading photographs taken at large
social (e.g. London 2012 Olympics) and world (e.g. Philippines Typhoon) events, where the user acts the role of the
amateur photo journalist. As a result, photo sharing websites such as YouthMedia2 have been setup targeted at these
photo journalists.
Organising these images is difficult as a result of the semantic gap [6] and lack of annotations provided by users [11].
Due to this, an entire field of work has focused on the automatic annotation of images [6, 4]. Despite the progress made
in the last two decades, fully automatic methods still perform lower than what is required for industry and therefore
real life applications have instead adopted semi-automatic
tag recommendation approaches, allowing users to annotate their images from a list of suggested tags. Aside from
Flickr’s recommendation approach, there have been many
photo tag recommendation methods proposed in recent years
[11, 3]. These approaches all recommend tags based on historical Flickr data which introduces a number of problems,
however, as discussed in the following section. We conjecture
that many of these problems can be alleviated by exploiting
social media and encyclopaedic data.
By recommending on historical data, if a new social/world
event occurs, the recommendation model will be slow in considering the new evidence, due to the delay between users
taking and uploading photographs, hence reducing the training set size and quality of suggested tags. Figure 1 highlights this “time lag” problem for our collection covering the
Austin City Limits (ACL) 2012 music festival. This difference is clearly observed where images are uploaded, on
average, around 50 days later than they are taken. Not only
are images uploaded much later, but the volume of images is
many magnitude smaller than the volume of tweets posted
for a given event, as shown in Figure 2. Twitter is both
faster and offers wider and denser coverage (more users) for
a given event than Flickr. Further, other issues exist with relying on Flickr data for tag recommendation purposes; batch
tagging functionality (where users can tag multiple images
with a single tag set) allows a single user to have overriding
influence over the content of a tag co-occurrence matrix and
ultimately the tag recommendations computed from this.

With the rise in popularity of smart phones, there has been
a recent increase in the number of images taken at large social (e.g. festivals) and world (e.g. natural disasters) events
which are uploaded to image sharing websites such as Flickr.
As with all online images, they are often poorly annotated,
resulting in a difficult retrieval scenario. To overcome this
problem, many photo tag recommendation methods have
been introduced, however, these methods all rely on historical Flickr data which is often problematic for a number of
reasons, including the time lag problem (i.e. in our collection, users upload images on average 50 days after taking
them, meaning “training data” is often out of date). In this
paper, we develop an image annotation model which exploits textual content from related Twitter and Wikipedia
data which aims to overcome the discussed problems. The
results of our experiments show and highlight the merits
of exploiting social media data for annotating event images,
where we are able to achieve recommendation accuracy comparable with a state-of-the-art model.

Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.3.1 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Content Analysis and Indexing
Keywords: Twitter; Wikipedia; Tag recommendation

1.

INTRODUCTION

Today, taking and sharing images is a far easier and accessible process than it once was. With the advancement
of smart phone camera technology, photographers are able
to quickly and cheaply take photographs whilst being able
∗This

research was supported by the European Community’s FP7
Programme under grant agreements nr 288024 (LiMoSINe)

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ACM SIGIR 2014
Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07 ...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2609538.

1
2

1175

http://www.flickr.com
http://www.youthmedia.eu

2.

Day Taken

3

2

1

5

10

15
20
25
Day Uploaded

30

35

Figure 1: Comparison of an image’s taken vs upload time. Vertical line indicates the end of the festival.

Cumulative Count

105
104
103
Tweets Posted
Images Uploaded

102
0

RELATED WORK

The automatic process of annotating images with tags
takes two forms: automatic image annotation, which looks
to identify tags based solely on the image contents, and
photo tag recommendation which considers the tags already
assigned to an image in order to offer new suggestions.
Automatic Image Annotation (AIA): Automatic image annotation has been a widely researched area over the
last decade with a large number of works attempting to
bridge the semantic gap between low level image features
and high level concepts [5, 6]. Lavrenko et al. [5] introduced the Cross-Media Relevance Models (CMRM) to predict the probability of generating a word given visual “blobs”.
Athanasakos et al. [1] compared two existing models showing that the high performance reported was actually a result of the evaluation scheme and test set. Makadia et al.
[6] showed that many existing “state-of-the-arts” could be
outperformed by adopting a K-nearest neighbour approach
trained on global colour and texture features.
As these works consider only visual appearance, their performance is often unsatisfactory due to the presence of the
semantic gap [6]. In this paper, we therefore focus on the
semi-automatic process of tag recommendation.
Photo Tag Recommendation (PTR): Sigurbjornsson et
al. [11] proposed a tag co-occurrence recommendation strategy to support users annotating photos on Flickr. Garg et
al. [3] offered personalised tag recommendations by combining suggestions made from personalised and global tag
co-occurrence matrices. Rae et al. [10] exploited a user’s
social context on Flickr in the recommendation process by
combining different contexts, such as a user’s tagging history, their social circles and groups they are members of.
These works, however, make suggestions based only on
the tags available in historical images, often resulting in outdated and unsatisfactory tag recommendations. In our work,
we address this problem by exploiting instantaneous text
streams from Twitter and Wikipedia for PTR.
Social Media for Annotation: Recently a number of
works have also considered the vast amount of social media
content for multimedia purposes. Picault et al. [9] presented
a framework for the indexing and retrieval of video segments
by employing text mining and topic modelling techniques in
order to collate related tweets. Shamma et al. [2] exploited
microblog posts for the segmentation and summarization of
broadcast media events e.g. 2008 presidential debate.
Despite the number of works exploiting social media for
multimedia applications, the potential of social media data
for photo tag recommendation purposes has not yet been
explored. In this work, we propose a photo tag recommendation model which draws evidence from both social media
streams and Wikipedia, presenting preliminary results for
this application.

2
4
6
8
10
Days since start of Austin Limits Festival 2012
Figure 2: Volume of ACL Tweets vs Flickr Images

Additionally, as users tend to annotate Flickr images with
a small number of popular tags [11], there is a lower topic
coverage on Flickr in comparison to the vast amount of content and coverage of tweets and users on Twitter. In this
paper, we propose to use social media streams to annotate
Flickr images corresponding to events.
Flickr and Twitter both contain noisy user data, however;
in comparison, the collaborative crowdsourced approach of
Wikipedia offers a structured data source containing less
irrelevant content (i.e. noise), whilst maintaining fast update speeds [8]. Due to the curated nature of Wikipedia, in
this paper we propose to use its content as a more reliable
source of information in order to “counter” the noisy nature
of Flickr/Twitter for photo tag recommendation purposes.
This paper attempts to address the following questions:
1. RQ1: Can noisy social media streams, such as Twitter,
be exploited in order to annotate images online? How can
we effectively address these noise issues?
2. RQ2: Can Wikipedia content also be exploited in order
to offer reliable photo tag recommendations? Does a combination of social media and Wikipedia sources improve
photo tag recommendation accuracy further?

3.

The rest of this paper is as follows: In Section 2 we discuss existing image annotation and photo tag recommendation techniques. Section 3 details our recommendation
methodology whilst we discuss our collection and evaluation
procedure in Section 4. Section 5 details the findings of our
results before concluding in Section 6.

METHODOLOGY

In the following section we first formulate the problem
of tag recommendation, before describing how we exploit
Twitter and Wikipedia data for the purposes of photo tag
recommendation.
Problem Statement: Let m denote an image in our collection, containing a set of tags, d, assigned by the user.

1176

The overall goals in tag recommendation is therefore to recommend a set of tags, p, given a subset of tags, q, from d
(q ⊂ d), so that it maximizes P ∩ (d − q).
Annotating Event Images: Photographs taken at social
and world events present an interesting challenge for annotation models as there exists much evidence from many
disparate sources (i.e. Tweets, Flickr images and Wikipedia
articles). Given the amount, varying quality and types of
data present, there are many challenges regarding its exploitation for PTR purposes. The following sections detail
the challenges and exploitation of each data source.
Twitter Data: Using Twitter data presents a number of
challenges for tag recommendation; the largest problem being that of noise where tweets are short, contain misspelt
words, colloquial expressions and often irrelevant information. In order to overcome the problem of irrelevant data,
we consider only those tweets containing predefined hashtags3 which refer to the event in question. We address the
identification of hashtags for an event manually as this is not
the purpose of this paper; however, in a real world scenario,
we would rely on an event detection model [7].
Using this approach we are able to address noise from a
tweet topic relevance perspective, but not from a tweet content perspective. To remove irrelevant terms from tweets,
we use the popular Stanford Parser [7] to conduct part-ofspeech (POS) tagging on each tweet. Table 1 summarises
the term types for each data type. As can be observed,
Flickr images are mostly annotated with nouns and entities; therefore a successful recommendation strategy should
also suggest mostly nouns. In our approach, we therefore
suggest only nouns/entities, thus ignoring many irrelevant
terms present in tweets (e.g. punctuation, stopwords, foreign words etc) which are not useful for PTR purposes.
Wikipedia Data: Our approach assumes we are able to
identify the relevant Wikipedia article for an event in question. We achieve this process automatically by exploiting
a database of Wikipedia URL redirects (5M url {extension, article} pairs); we match the event hashtags against
this database. As before, we classify each term within the
Wikipedia article using the described POS tagger.

Flickr
Twitter
Wikipedia

Noun

Entity

Verb

Adjective

0.566
0.135
0.198

0.204
0.098
0.143

0.0677
0.109
0.083

0.091
0.055
0.006

Table 1: Fraction of term types per collection. Highest fraction
per type are shown in bold.

4.

EXPERIMENTATION

In the following section we first detail our collection before
discussing our systems and evaluation procedure.
Evaluation Collection: we collect tweets, Flickr images
and Wikipedia content related to the ACL 2012 music festival. We selected the ACL music festival for experimentation purposes as (i) there exists much related Flickr, Twitter and Wikipedia content (ii) there exist many sub-events
3

within this overall event e.g. bands playing etc (iii) the event
contains temporally and geographical diverse content. The
collection is as follows:
1. Images: we searched Flickr using the standard search
API4 for images annotated with one of the discussed event
tags3 taken between 11-15 Oct 2012. In total we collect
2,750 images taken by 68 users, annotated with 732 different tags, with each image containing on average 10.6
tags.
2. Tweets: we used a subset of a well known public Twitter
event collection [7], selecting tweets containing one of the
predefined hashtags3 which are posted between 11-15 Oct
2012. In total we collect 1,507 tweets, containing around
14,570 different terms, posted by 1,309 users.
3. Wikipedia: Finally, as previously discussed, we also consider the Wikipedia page. From this document, which describes the history of the festival and not the 2012 festival
in isolation, we extract 949 different terms.
Systems: we compare recommendations computed from
Twitter and Wikipedia as well as a combination, against
a naı̈ve and an industry strength baseline. Firstly, we introduce our systems which offer suggestions from a single
source:
1. Flickr(F): firstly, we compare against a naı̈ve baseline
which suggests the most popular tags on Flickr. We propose this baseline to replicate the cold start scenario i.e.
where an image contains no tags to suggest upon.
2. Flickr(FR): secondly, we use an industry strength baseline
by using those tag recommendations made on the Flickr
website. Specifically, we consider the top tags as suggested
from the getRelated API method5 , for the input tag, acl.
3. Twitter(T/TP): in our first Twitter approach, we suggest the most frequent terms within the related stream
of Tweets (T). In our second approach, we suggest only
the most frequent extracted nouns and entities (TP), thus
reducing noise.
4. Twitter(TR(N)): inspired by [3], we use a tf -idf based tag
recommendation approach based on N input tags (randomly extracted from an image) which computes recommendations from on a stream of n tweets. In this approach, we model tf as a normalised co-occurrence vector
for a given term, where each position counts the number
of tweets the given term co-exists in; idf is the vector of
inverse document frequencies computed as log(n/n(tj ) ),
where n(tj ) is the number of tweets containing term tj .
Recommendations are computed as the dot product of
these vectors with contributions added for multiple input
tags.
5. Wikipedia(W/WP): in our first Wikipedia approach, we
suggest the most frequent terms within the related Wikipedia
article (W). In our second approach, we suggest only the
most frequent extracted nouns and entities (WP), thus
reducing noise.
Secondly, we combine recommendations from Twitter and
Wikipedia using the following methods:
4

acl, acl2012, acl2012acl, aclfest, aclfest2012, aclfestival, aclfestival2012, aclmusicfest, aclmusicfestival

5

1177

www.flickr.com/services/api/flickr.photos.search.html
www.flickr.com/services/api/flickr.tags.getRelated.html

Baselines
P@5
MRR

Individual

Combination

F

FR

T

W

TP

WP

TR(1)

TR(2)

TR(3)

TP ∪ WP

TP ∩ WP

TR(1) ∩ WP

0.045
0.075

0.525
0.690

0.003
0.004

0.105*
0.510*

0.231*
0.609*

0.101*
0.507*

0.271*
0.521*

0.313*
0.452*

0.312*
0.389*

0.101*
0.507*

0.333*
0.573*

0.469*
0.693*

Table 2: Recommendation Performance; statistical significance results against the F are denoted as * p < 0.05

6.

1. Intersection (∩): We combine into one list containing only
the intersecting tags weighted by a given tag’s position in
the original lists. This weighting scheme is computed as
1/p, where p is the tag’s position in a list, thus giving
precedence to those in higher ranks. The weights from
each list for each tag are summed. The top tags ordered
by decreasing weight are returned.
2. Union (∪): We combine by considering the union of the
lists. The same weighting scheme is used as before, with
the top tags returned in decreasing order.

In this paper we developed an automatic approach for
annotating event images by exploiting relevant social media and Wikipedia data. Specifically, we proposed photo
tag recommendations based on significant nouns and entities present in tweets and Wikipedia data related to the
Austin City Limits 2012 music festival. In this work, we
highlighted the merit of computing recommendations based
on these streams as an alternative to recommending based
on Flickr data (which is often sparse and out-of-date due to
users uploading images long after they are taken). In order
to address noise present in social media streams, we applied
natural language processing techniques and combined recommendations made with those computed from structured
Wikipedia data. This work proposes a new area for image
annotation research, and for this purpose we have released
our test collection online6 . In future work, we plan to evaluate our approach for more, and varying types of events
(e.g. natural disasters), as well as employ more elaborate
techniques (e.g. topic modelling, clustering etc) for recommendation purposes.

Metrics: We compute performance metrics by comparing
those recommendations against those provided by the user.
Using these user tags, we compute metrics used by previous
work in image tag recommendation [3]:
1. Precision at Five (P@5): The percentage of relevant tags
amongst the top five, averaged over all runs.
2. Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR): 1/r where r is the rank of
the first relevant tag returned, averaged over all runs.

5.

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

RESULTS

Firstly, from Table 2, we observe that by suggesting frequent nouns and entities from a related stream of tweets
(TP) we are able to significantly outperform our naı̈ve baseline, supporting our hypothesis (RQ1) that social media can
be exploited for PTR purposes. We improve upon this technique in a more elaborate tf-idf model (T(N)) which makes
suggestions based on N input tags, achieving up to 31% recommendation accuracy for P@5. Further, we observe the importance of using part-of-speech tagging methods as a technique to address noise (RQ1) in Twitter for PTR by comparing the large difference in accuracies between the systems
which suggest only nouns/entities (TP) against the system
which suggests all terms (T).
Secondly, from Table 2, we observe that Wikipedia can
also be exploited for tag recommendation purposes, however its application is not as effective as when recommending on Twitter data, perhaps due the narrower coverage
of Wikipedia articles. The most effective recommendation
strategy combines suggestions based on both Twitter and
Wikipedia data (TR(1) ∩ WP) highlighting the complementary nature of these evidences and supporting our initial
research question (RQ2). Specifically, using an intersecting combination approach for both sources (TR(1)∩WP),
accuracy which is almost comparable with state-of-the-art
techniques (FR) is achieved. Therefore, for images taken at
new events, which lack sufficient training data on Flickr (due
to the time lag problem), tag recommendation approaches
can instead make suggestions based on social media and
Wikipedia streams with high accuracy.

7.

REFERENCES

[1] K. Athanasakos, and J. Jose. A framework for evaluating
automatic image annotation algorithms. In ECIR, ’10.
[2] L. K. D. A. Shamma and E. Churchill. Statler:
Summarizing media through short-message services. In
ACM CSCW, ’10.
[3] N. Garg and I. Weber. Personalized, interactive tag
recommendation for flickr. In ACM RecSys, ’08.
[4] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. Hinton. Imagenet
classification with deep convolutional neural networks. In
NIPS, ’12.
[5] V. Lavrenko, M. Choquette, and W. B. Croft. Cross-lingual
relevance models. In ACM SIGIR, ’02.
[6] A. Makadia, V. Pavlovic, and S. Kumar. Baselines for
image annotation. In IJCV, ’10.
[7] A. J. McMinn, Y. Moshfeghi, and J. M. Jose. Building a
large-scale corpus for evaluating event detection on twitter.
In ACM CIKM, 2013.
[8] M. Osborne, S. Petrovi?, R. Mccreadie, C. Macdonald, and
I. Ounis. Bieber no more: First story detection using
twitter and Wikipedia. In ACM SIGIR TAIA, ’13.
[9] J. Picault, M. Ribiere, and Y. Gaste. Indexing video
segments using microblogs. In CBMI, ’13.
[10] A. Rae, B. Sigurbjörnsson, and R. van Zwol. Improving tag
recommendation using social networks. In APFHI, ’10.
[11] B. Sigurbjörnsson and R. van Zwol. Flickr tag
recommendation based on collective knowledge. In ACM
WWW, ’08.

6

1178

http://mir.dcs.gla.ac.uk/resources/

