Inferring Topic-Dependent Influence Roles of Twitter Users
1

Chengyao Chen1, Dehong Gao1, Wenjie Li1, Yuexian Hou2

Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin University, China
cscchen@comp.polyu.edu.hk, gaodehong_polyu@163.com,
cswjli@comp.polyu.edu.hk, yxhou@tju.edu.cn
Though all influential users perform influence on others, Brown
and Hayes [2] have verified that the way people use to influence
others varies and as a result different kinds of influence produce
different effects. Someone strongly praises a product and
persuades others to buy. Someone changes others’ opinions with
professional analysis. Someone timely informs others the latest
news of a product. And someone promotes the product by the
popularity. Clearly, influential users play different influence roles.
Meanwhile, according to marketing research, a company may
have different objectives in different promotion stages, and need
the users with different influence roles to conform with [2]. For
example, a company who targets to improve product brand
awareness may want to seek help from the users with high
popularity. However, for a company whose product quality is
questioned by customers, it may be a better choice to invite
domain experts who have professional knowledge to explain and
convince customers. Obviously, selecting specific influence roles
in accordance with various marketing objectives is more effective
than just looking for influential users. This motivates us to further
analyze and infer users’ influence roles in this work.

ABSTRACT
Twitter, as one of the most popular social media platforms,
provides a convenient way for people to communicate and interact
with each other. It has been well recognized that influence exists
during users’ interactions. Some pioneer studies on finding
influential users have been reported in the literature, but they do
not distinguish different influence roles, which are of great value
for various marketing purposes. In this paper, we move a step
forward trying to further distinguish influence roles of Twitter
users in a certain topic. By defining three views of features
relating to topic, sentiment and popularity respectively, we
propose a Multi-view Influence Role Clustering (MIRC)
algorithm to group Twitter users into five categories.
Experimental results show the effectiveness of the proposed
approach in inferring influence roles.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Information Search
and Retrieval—clustering

General Terms

To better describe influence roles, we develop five distinct
categories, i.e., fans, information disseminator, expert, celebrity
and others, based on the definition of influence role in the
influencer guidebook [3]. The descriptions of them are
summarized in Table 1 below.

Algorithms, Design, Experimentation

Keywords
Twitter; Influential users; Multi-view

Table 1. Five categories of influence roles
Role
Category

1. INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, Twitter has become one of the most popular social
media platforms for people to share their attitudes or minds. It
also allows people to communicate with each other based on
following or friend relationships. The interaction makes it
possible for users to influence each other and further creates
opportunities for business companies to conduct online marketing
activities [1]. More and more business companies have paid much
attention to locating influential users and manipulating their
opinions to attract potential customers or improve sales.
Understanding influential users over large-scale networks is
crucial to business marketing management.

Fans
Information
Disseminator
Expert
Celebrity
Others

Influence Manner
(Way)
Support and defend
products
Publish product
information, like news.
Gather professional
facts and opinions
Endorse and promote
products through high
popularity
Show no obvious
influence

Marketing
Effect
Improve sales
Enhance brand
memorability
Improve
reputation
Improve
awareness
None

Most previous work on influential user identification exploits the
features like the numbers of followers and/or retweets and/or
mentions [4, 5]. However, these features are not adequate to
distinguish influence roles. With reference to the influencer
guidebook, we define three views to represent Twitter users and to
infer their influence roles. Among them, the topic-view describes
users’ interests to the specific topic. The sentiment-view is related
to the opinions expressed by the users. The popularity-view
represents the reputation degree of users. Although each view can
only partially reflect the influence roles from its own perspective,
the three views together provide more complete information for
inferring influence roles when they complement with each other.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned
by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To
copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior
specific
permission
and/or
a
fee.
Request
permissions
from Permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR '14, July 06 - 11 2014, Gold Coast, QLD, Australia
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM 9781-4503-2257-7/14/07…$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2609545

1203

its sentiment polarity and strength. Based on AFINN, the
sentiment score of a tweet is calculated by aggregating the
sentiment strengths of all the words in it. For a given user, we
compute the average positive-sentiment scores and average
negative-sentiment scores to represent two attributes in sentimentview.

Based on these three views, we propose a Multi-view Influence
Role Clustering (MIRC) algorithm to partition influential users
into five categories. Unlike existing multi-view clustering
algorithms, we allow the cluster numbers in different views to be
different. Then we leverage the cluster information from different
views to form the final clustering results. The experimental results
on inferring influence roles demonstrate the superiority of MIRC
over various existing single-view clustering, multi-view clustering
and a baseline approaches.

3.1.3 Popularity-view Representation
Apart from the topical content and the sentiment representations,
the popularity (or say the authority) of one user also indicates
his/her influence role. We select three representative features that
usually used to represent the popularity of a person for this view,
including the number of followers, the number of followees and a
binary value indicating if a user has a verified account or not,
officially provided by Twitter Inc.

2. RELATED WORK
There exist several pioneer studies on ranking influential users in
social networks. Agarwal et. al. [6] proposed a preliminary model
to identify influential blog users based on the statistics of their
posts, like the posts to which the author refers, and the posts that
refer to this post, etc. In [4], three measurements, i.e., the number
of followers, the number of retweets and the number of mentions,
were used to rank the influence of Twitter users. Cha et al. [4]
noticed that there were different categories of influential users,
without give a clear and comprehensive definition of influential
user categories. Weng et al. [5] proposed the TwitterRank, which
was extended from PageRank, to identify influential Twitter users
by taking both the link structure and the topical similarity into
consideration. Bakshy et al. [7], on the other hand, focused on the
repost rates. By tracking 74 million diffusion events in Twitter,
they demonstrated that under most circumstances the individuals
with less-than-average influence were more cost-effective for
marketing. This suggested that the most popular users were not
necessarily the most influential users and there was a need to
define distinct influence roles. While prior work considered
finding influential users as a retrieval task, they failed to
distinguish different influence roles. To take one step further, our
work aims to cluster influential users into a certain groups
according to their specific roles.

3.2 Multi-View Influence Role Clustering
Algorithm
To obtain a better performance for the dataset that gives
representations from different feature spaces, multi-view
clustering approaches are proposed to partition data into clusters
by integrating the features from multiple views, rather than
relying on the features from a single view [9]. They have been
successfully applied in various applications, like objective
recognition [10], document clustering [11], and handwriting
recognition [9]. These approaches share a common assumption,
i.e., the features in each view are sufficient for clustering and thus
the cluster numbers in different views are same. However, from
our previous analysis, a single view alone cannot partition
influential users well into five categories of influence roles. This
is because a single view can only depict a specific aspect of
influence roles. Therefore, it is more reasonable to allow the
cluster numbers of different views to be different. For example,
fans, information disseminators and experts have more interests in
the topic than celebrities and others. The topic representations of
fans, information disseminators and experts tend to be distinct
from celebrities. Likewise, the sentiment representations tend to
differentiate the fans who always post tweets with positive
sentiments, the information disseminators whose tweets are
mainly neutral ones, and the experts whose opinions may be
negative. And the popularity view tends to distinguish Twitter
users with different degree of popularity. It appears that each view
infers different aspects of influence roles. To combine partial
distinction ability of each single view together, our proposed
approach groups data into different clusters (i.e., local clusters)
based on each single view first, and then use the local cluster
information to form the final influence role clusters (i.e., global
clusters).

3. METHOD
We describe influence roles from three different views relating to
topic, sentiment and popularity, and propose an approach, namely
Multi-view Influence Role Clustering (MIRC) to infer the topicdependent influence roles of Twitter users.

3.1 Three-View User Representation
3.1.1 Topic-view Representation
The topic-view describes the interests of a user to a specific topic.
Thus, the topic profile is the core and needs to be constructed first.
To start with, the topic word(s) like “iPhone” is selected as the
seed word(s). Then, using the mutual information, the K most
relevant words that co-occur with the seed word(s) within a
window of size (i.e., two in our experiments) are extracted as the
topical keywords and form the topic profile. These K words can
provide a more complete picture of the whole topic. For all tweets
of a given user i, a topical vector ti weighed by tf-idf is built to
capture his/her word distribution over the extracted topical words.

On this basis, the Multi-view Influence Role Clustering (MIRC)
algorithm is proposed. It can be formally described as follows.
Let U  u1 , u2 ,..., un denote Twitter users, and n is the total
number of users. A user can be represented by multi-view
features  X 1 , X 2 , ... , X m , where m is the number of the

3.1.2 Sentiment-view Representation

d n

v
views and X v 
is the v-th view with dv dimensional
features. Let the local cluster number for the view v be K v , and

The sentiment-view reveals the preferred attitudes when one
expresses opinions. The attitudes with different influence roles
can be different. For example, for a product, its fans tend to give
all positive feedback, while experts may express both positively
and negatively based on their analysis from the facts. In order to
catch the sentiment of tweets, we use the sentiment lexicon
AFINN labeled by Nielsen [8], where each word is attached with
an integer value between negative five and positive five denoting

the global cluster number is t. The goal of MIRC is to partition
the users U into t clusters with the m-view features. This can be
formulated as the following optimization problem.

1204

m

n

min
 
v
v

G ,P

s.t.

,C

v

Xi

v1 i 1

t

G

ik

k 1
Kv

T

 Gi P v C

 

t

 1,  P

v
rk

v
rk

r 1

T

v

2



,
(1)

1 ,

v



v1

 0,1

P

t K v

assigned to one and only one cluster. P 
is the mapping
matrix from the global clusters to the local clusters. If Prk v  1 ,

v

C

,D

,G , P

m



v

v

v

H

is the local cluster

,

v

 Tr X

T

 C v P v GT D v X

v

v

T

 C v P v GT

D v is the degree matrix derived from E
d iiv 

1
2 evi

v

T

(3)

v

The objective function in Equation (2) is differentiated with
respect to C v . The optimal solution of C v can be obtained by
setting the derivation to zero.

C


v

X

v

D v GP

v

P

v

T

G T D v GP

1

v

We separately update every row of G, i.e., Gi for each user. In
each view, for user ui, we find the local cluster for it that
minimizes the distance between it and its assigned local cluster.

Gi

v

T

xi v  Gi P v C

v

T

2

 1,P

v
rk

 

 0,1

Number
9
29
17
10
95
160

Due to the lack of annotated datasets, we randomly select 160
users from these 5120 influential users and manually annotate
their influence roles for the evaluation purpose. Annotators are
invited to identify the influence roles for each user, and we finally
get the consensus of all annotators to make up our experiment
dataset. The annotated user number of each category of influence
roles is listed in Table 2.

Fix C v , P v , D v and update the global cluster
assignment G

Gi  arg min 

2

We choose the topic “iPhone” to conduct the preliminary
experiments for influence role clustering on Twitter. Using the
Twitter function “Who to follow” and taking “iPhone” as the
search query, we select top ten users as seed users. Then we crawl
down the English followers of these seed users, and assume that
they all have certain interests in the topic and have the ability to
influence others more or less [13]. Altogether, we collect about
900 thousands users and monitor their postings from Sep 1st to
Oct 31st, 2013. To guarantee the diversity of influence roles, the
top 10K most followed users and the top 10K users posting tweets
that contain “iPhone” most are selected to form the set of
influential users. Among them, 5120 users, together with their
postings and account information, are randomly selected for the
preliminary experiments.

T
T
(5)
E v  X v  GP v C v
We apply the following iterative updating procedure to solve the
above minimization problem.

Fix G , P v , D v and update the local cluster center C

T

4. EXPERIMENTS AND DISCUSSION

(4)

and



v
rk

Influence Role
Fans
Information Disseminators
Expert
Celebrity
Others
Total

.

, i  1, 2 ,..., n ,

v

(6)

 1,  P
r 1

 Gi P v C

Table 2. Details about the experiment dataset

where

H

t

T

After clustering, we assign each cluster to a category of influence
roles by employing the method for evaluation of clustering [12].
We choose the assignment that maximizes the average precision
on experimental data as the mappings from user clusters to
influence roles.

(2)

v1

v
rk

i 1

v

These are the four main iteration phases in MIRC. Each phase is a
convex problem which is related to one variable and converges to
a local optimal solution. As a result, the whole algorithm is
guaranteed to converge to its local solution.

To solve the minimization problem above, we propose an iterative
updating procedure. According to [10], we rewrite the objective
function by introducing a diagonal matrix D ( v ) for each view.
min
v

P

k 1

center in the v-th view, and  is the factor vector to balance the
weight of each view and it is initialized manually.

v

n

 arg min
 Xi
v

s.t.  P

v

O

v

Kv

the users assigned to the cluster r are all in the local cluster k. The
constraints for P v in Equation (1) ensure that every local cluster
must be mapped to at least one global cluster, and every global
cluster must be mapped to only one local cluster.
Given Gi and P v , Gi P ( v ) can be seen as the local cluster
assignment for user ui in the v-th view. C

v

We update P v which minimizes Equation (6) from all its
candidate matrices that satisfy the constraints.

where Gi represents the global cluster assignment for the user ui
and it satisfies 1-of-K coding scheme, i.e., the user ui must be
v

Fix C v , D v , G and update the global and local cluster
mapping matrix P

 

 1,P

v
rk

Fix C v , P v , G and update D v

D v can be updated by Equations (4) and (5).

m

 1,Gik  0,1 ,  

P
k 1

v

,

We compare MIRC with (1) the baseline K-means clustering
(BKC) [14], which concatenates all features together; (2) two
existing multi-view clustering approaches including Multi-view
K-means Clustering (MKC) [10] and Negative Matrix
Factorization (NMF) based Multi-view Clustering (NMFMC) [9].

t

s.t. Gi  {0,1},  Gi  1
k 1

1205

We also compare with (3) K-means Clustering (SC) on the three
single views we design, which are indicated by SCtopic, SCsentiment
and SCaccount, respectively.

6. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The work described in this paper is supported by Hong Kong
Research Grants Council (PolyU 5202/12E) and National Nature
Science Foundation of China (61272291).

For all approaches, we calculate the cosine similarities between
users with the features in the topic representation, and regard the
cosine similarity vector of each user as his/her features in topic
view. The cosine similarity features perform well in the
experiment. Besides, the features in the three views are all
normalized to [0, 1] before they are fed into.

7. REFERENCES
[1] A. Anagnostopoulos, R. Kumar and M. Mahdian.Influence
and Correlation in Social Networks. In Proceedings of the
14th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining, Las Vegas, Nevada, USA, 2008.

Specifically, we set the cluster number of topic view to 2
representing whether users show their interests to the topic or not,
set the cluster number of sentiment view to 3 representing
negative, neutral and positive sentiments, and set the cluster
number of account view to 3 describing high, medium and low
popularity. The parameter  ( v ) that is used to balance the
contribution of single view clustering to the multi-view clustering
is set to (0.0125, 0.6305, 0.3570) empirically. In addition,  in
MKC and  in NMFMC are set to 0.1 and 0.01 respectively for
their best performances.

[2] D. Brown .and N. Hayes. Influencer Marketing: Who Really
Influences Your Customers? Butterworth-Heinemann,
Oxford, 2008.
[3] Word of Mouth Marketing Association.
WOMMA's Influencer Guidebook, 2013.
[4] M. Cha., H. Haddadi, F. Benevenuto. and P. K.Gummadi.
Measuring User Influence in Twitter: The Million Follower
Fallacy. In 4th Int’l AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social
Media, Washington, DC, USA, 2010.
[5] J. Weng.., E. P.Lim., J. Jiang. and Q. He. Twitterrank:
finding topic-sensitive influential twitterers. In Proceedings
of the 3rd ACM International Conference on Web search and
Data Mining, New York City, NY, USA, 2010.
[6] N.Agarwal, H. Liu., L.Tang. and P. S.Yu. Identifying the
influential bloggers in a community. In Proceedings of the
1st International Conference on Web Search and Data
Mining, Stanford, CA, USA, 2008.
[7] S. Bhagat, G. Cormode and S. Muthukrishnan. Node
classification in social networks. In Social Network Data
Analytics. Springer US, pages 115-148. 2011.
[8] F. Å Nielsen. A new ANEW: Evaluation of a word list for
sentiment analysis in microblogs. arXiv preprint arXiv, pages
1103-2903.2011.
[9] J. Liu, C. Wang, J. Gao and J. Han. Multi-view clustering
via joint nonnegative matrix factorization. In Proceedings of
the SIAM Data Mining Conference, San Diego, California,
USA, 2013.
[10] X. Cai, F.Nie and H. Huang. Multi-view k-means clustering
on big data. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Beijing, CHN, 2013.
[11] S. Bickel and T. Scheffer. Multi-View Clustering. In
Proceedings of the 4th IEEE International Conference on
Data Mining, Brighton, UK, 2004.
[12] C. D. Manning, P. Raghavan, H. Schütze. Introduction to
information retrieval. Cambridge: Cambridge university
press, 2008.
[13] E. Bakshy, J. M. Hofman, W. A. Mason and D. J. Watts.
Everyone's an influencer: quantifying influence on twitter.
In Proceedings of the fourth ACM International Conference
on Web Search and Data Mining, Hong Kong, 2011.
[14] J. A. Hartigan and M.A. Wong. Algorithm AS 136: A kmeans clustering algorithm. Applied statistics, pages 100108.1979.

Table 3. Comparison of the clustering methods
Approach
Baseline
BKC
SCtopic
Single-view
SCsentiment
Clustering
SCaccount
NMFKC
Multi-view
Clustering
MKC
MIRC

MP
0.3668
0.3914
0.3899
0.4490
0.4222
0.3939
0.4527

MR
0.3232
0.3406
0.3694
0.3774
0.3456
0.3024
0.4249

MF
0.2784
0.3009
0.3092
0.3322
0.3096
0.3116
0.3673

We use three commonly-used metrics for the performance
evaluation. They are macro-average precision (MP), macroaverage recall (MR), and macro-average F-measure (MF). As
shown in Table 3, the performance of the proposed MIRC beats
all others in all three metrics. By setting different cluster numbers
for different views, we get more accurate results than the other
multi-view clustering approaches. Roughly, the multi-view
clustering MKC and NMFKC without such a setting perform
comparably with the single-view clustering. It appears to be a
good idea to use the local clustering information of each view to
infer a better global clustering result. Meanwhile, by adding
multiple views features rather than a single view to build a more
complete user representation, it is not surprising to see that MIRC
outperforms all single-view clustering.

5. CONCLUSION
In this work, we address the issue of inferring Topic-Dependent
influence role. We propose a Multi-view Influence Role
Clustering (MIRC) algorithm to partition Twitter users into five
clusters with three views of features including topic view,
sentiment view and popularity view. In MIRC, different cluster
numbers are allowed for different views. The experiment results
indicate the effectiveness of our proposed approach. In the future,
we will continue to explore more features (e.g., representative
words in user profiles) and/or exploit other models like the
language models to further improve performances.

1206

