On Predicting Religion Labels in Microblogging Networks
Minh-Thap Nguyen

Ee-Peng Lim

Living Analytics Research Centre
Singapore Management University

Living Analytics Research Centre
Singapore Management University

mtnguyen.2012@smu.edu.sg

eplim@smu.edu.sg

ABSTRACT

These survey efforts are generally effective but are intrusive
and time consuming. On the other hand, online social media
users have their religion attributes embedded in the content
and interaction with other users. It is therefore interesting
to recover these users’ religion labels from their social media
data, and to do so accurately.
Objectives. In this paper, we attempt to predict users’
religions using their microblogging data. This task has not
been addressed so far and datasets with religion labels are
not publicly available. The task is particularly interesting
for a user community that has a mixture of users with different religious beliefs. Our research begins with gathering
a dataset covering a set of 111,767 Twitter users located in
Singapore, their follow relationships, and their tweets. This
Twitter dataset allows us to explore both content and structure features relevant to users’ religious beliefs. This also
distinguishes our user label prediction research from previous works which consider random sets of users, i.e., who are
strangers to one another. We manually annotate the religion
labels of over one thousand users who declare religion beliefs
in their biographies. Using these labeled data, we are able
to evaluate methods that predict user religion labels.
User religion prediction task is challenging. Most users do
not reveal their religion labels explicitly. Out of the set of
Singapore users we are able to identify only 1029 users, or <
1%, who mention their religions clearly in their biographies.
Vast majority of them do not. The sparsity of labeled data
is even more severe for religions that have very few believers. Label sparsity poses several challenges to the prediction
problem. Firstly, there are few labeled users for training
classifiers. Secondly, even with labeled users, we may also
have insufficient content and interaction data generated by
some of them to learn an accurate classifier.
Related Works. Despite no previous works on predicting user religion, there are other related works on mining
online social media user attributes including political affiliation, gender, ethnicity, and country. Bhargava and Kondrak performed language classification of people names using word and n-gram name features [3]. Pennacchiotti and
Popescu proposed a classification method combining gradient boosted decision tree and graph updating to perform
classification of user political affiliations, ethnicity and favorite businesses [6]. Their decision tree classifiers represent
each user by their profile, tweeting behavior, linguistic content and social network features. It was then observed that
some user attributes are harder to classify than others. Al
Zamal et al. [1] showed that using neighbors’ features only
to predict age and political affiliation outperform using user

Religious belief plays an important role in how people behave, influencing how they form preferences, interpret events
around them, and develop relationships with others. Traditionally, the religion labels of user population are obtained
by conducting a large scale census study. Such an approach
is both high cost and time consuming. In this paper, we
study the problem of predicting users’ religion labels using
their microblogging data. We formulate religion label prediction as a classification task, and identify content, structure and aggregate features considering their self and social
variants for representing a user. We introduce the notion of
representative user to identify users who are important in
the religious user community. We further define features using representative users. We show that SVM classifiers using
our proposed features can accurately assign Christian and
Muslim labels to a set of Twitter users with known religion
labels.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.2.8 [Database Management]: Database Applications—
Data mining

Keywords
Religion Prediction; User Profiling; Social Networks

1.

INTRODUCTION

Motivation. In many consumer and social applications,
user attributes are required to suggest relevant and interesting products, content, services and social links. Among the
many user attributes is religion which has proven to be very
important in determining how users behave. Religion influences how users form preferences, interpret events around
them, and develop relationships with others. In the past,
religion labels are obtained by large scale user surveys run
by government agencies or large businesses with or without
financial incentives (e.g., lucky draws, direct discounts, etc.).
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR’14, July 6–11, 2014, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.
Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07 ...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2609547 .

1211

Table 1: Singapore Twitter Dataset
#
#
#
#
#

total users
total follow links
labeled as Christians
labeled as Muslim
total labeled users

Table 2: Selected keywords for assigning religion labels

111,767
1,770,272
581 (53.9%)
448 (41.6%)
1029 (100%)

Religion
Christian
Muslim

extracting users with biography fields containing any of the
keywords, followed by manually judging the religion label
for each extracted user based on their biographies. Only
those who clearly state their religion were then assigned the
Christian or Muslim label. As shown in Table 1, we managed to label 581 Christians and 448 Muslims. This composition structure is quite different from religion composition reported in the 2010 Singapore population census which shows
Christians, Muslim, Buddhists and Free-thinkers represent
18.3%, 33.3%, 14.7% and 17% respectively. This suggests
that Christian and Muslim users have higher propensity to
share their religious beliefs online. Buddhist and free-thinker
users in contrast are more reserved.

features only. This can be attributed to attributes’ high assortativity. Rao et al. [7] proposed two sets of features to
predict user gender, age, region origin and political affiliation. The first set of features are socio-linguistic words. The
second set of features are unigrams and bigrams of the tweet
text. Our work differs from the above works in several ways.
First, we focus on user religion prediction which has not been
studied earlier. Secondly, we approach the prediction task
for a given user community as opposed to a random set of
users who represent only sub-clusters of a larger community.
Contributions. We summarize our contributions as follows:
• We construct a very large user community consisting of
more than 111K users that belong to a community, and
assign the religion labels of about one thousand users
so as to study the user religion prediction problem.
This is also the first time the task is studied for a
large user community.

3.

REPRESENTATIVE USERS

In a social network, some users may appear to be more
important than others for a given religion. We are interested in determine these important users whose connections
may help in the prediction of religion labels. The standard
measures that characterize user importance in a network include degree centrality and pagerank. These measures however assume user importance is independent of their affiliation labels. For user religion prediction, we are interested in
measures based on the user’s importance in each affiliation
group. We define three new measures, called label-degree,
label-indegree and representative indegree ratio, as follows.
The label-degree of user u for label r, deg(u, r), is defined as the number of neighbors (based on both in-links
and out-links) of u from users with religion label r. The
label-indegree of u for a religion label r, indeg(u, r), is
defined as the number of links to user u from users with
religion label r. The representative indegree ratio of u,
max (u))+α
RInDeg(u), is defined as: RInDeg(u) = indeg(u,r
0
indeg(u,rmax
(u))+α
0
where rmax (u) = argmaxr indeg(u, r), and rmax (u) =
argmaxr6=rmax (u) indeg(u, r). The parameter α is a smoothing constant whose purpose is to prevent undefined values
0
when indeg(u, rmax
(u)) = 0. In the experiment, we set α to
1.
The representative degree ratio RInDeg(u) (> 1) measures the dominance of a specific religion compared with
other religions among u’s followers. The larger RInDeg(u),
the more dominance is a specific religion among the followers. This suggests that u is very important among the
followers with the specific religion affiliation. When u is
followed by only users of a single religion, RInDeg(u) =
indeg(u,rmax (u))+α
. For α = 1, RInDeg(u) = indeg(u, rmax (u))+
α
1. When u is not followed by any users with religion label
or when u is followed by equal largest groups of users with
different religion labels, RInDeg(u) = 1.
Due to the use of already labeled users, the three measures
are also quite different from the standard degree measure.
A high degree user may not have high indeg(u, r) for some
r (and also RInDeg(u)) if the user is not followed by any
labeled users.

• We systematically extract different types of user features covering both content and structure aspects of
Twitter data. The content word features are specially
selected to be relevant to the religion class labels. The
structure features are derived from the follow relationships among users. We propose a novel representative
user measure that allows us to determine users important among users sharing the same religion. Based on
this measure, we derive content and structure features
that improve the prediction accuracies.
• Using our proposed user features, we are able to train
highly accurate SVM classifiers that yields F1-scores
larger than 0.8 for both the Christian and Muslim labels. Such an accuracy level makes the classifiers useful
in different real world applications.

2.

Selected Keywords
jesus, christ, protestant, catholic, church
allah, muslim, islam, mosque

DATASET AND RELIGION LABELS

Twitter user community. We crawled the Twitter data
generated by about 110K users with Singapore specified as
their profile location in July 2012. These users were identified by first constructing a set of well known Singapore user
accounts as seeds. We then found other Singapore user accounts connected to the seeds. The process was repeated
several times before reaching the above user count. The
dataset consists of users’ profiles, tweets, and follow links
among the users. Table 1 shows the basic statistics of this
dataset.
User religion labeling. There are five main religions in
Singapore, namely, Buddhism, Taoism, Christianity, Islam,
and Hinduism. When we attempted to assign religion labels
to Singapore users, we found very few self-declared Buddhists, Taoists and Hindu’s in our dataset. We therefore
focus on labeling Christians and Muslims only. We manually searched religion specific keywords in the biography of
users as shown in Table 2. This was carried out by first

1212

Table 3: Top Representative Users (some names are truncated for space saving)
Rank
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

deg(u, r)
Christian
Muslim
konghee (141)
TaufikB... (126)
STcom (127)
SoSinga... (97)
JosephPrince (90)
banchot... (93)
mrbrown (89)
sezairi (69)
SoSinga... (82)
WaktuSo... (69)
chcsg (63)
STcom (66)
Channel... (52)
FauzieLaily (62)
Leticia... (49)
HadyMir... (59)
nccsg (44)
Norfasarie (59)
Xiaxue (44)
Channel... (43)

indeg(u, r)
Christian
Muslim
konghee (139)
TaufikB... (126)
STcom (127)
SoSinga... (97)
JosephPrince (90)
banchot... (93)
mrbrown (87)
sezairi (69)
SoSinga... (82)
WaktuSo... (69)
chcsg (63)
STcom (66)
Channel... (52)
FauzieLaily (62)
Leticia... (49)
HadyMir... (59)
nccsg (44)
Norfasarie (58)
Xiaxue (44)
Channel... (43)

RInDeg(u)
Christian
Muslim
konghee (140)
Norfasarie (59)
JosephPrince (91)
MediaCo... (32)
chcsg (64)
iNasuha (29)
nccsg (45)
fadhilf... (26)
joepurcell (36)
didicazli (25)
Celestfoo (35)
MuslimSG (24)
thezone... (33)
HyrulAnuar (24)
JianMingTan (27)
DearAbdullah (23)
garrettleejw (27)
Fiza O (23)
Chris H... (25)
TaufikB... (21)

Table 4: Categorization of Features
Self

Social

Content
- binary terms
- TF · IDF

Structural
- RInDeg
- label degree for each religion r
- label indeg for each religion r
- label outdeg for each religion r
- label Nindeg for each religion r
- label Noutdeg for each religion r

- binary terms from
neighbors only
- TF · IDF from
neighbors only
- binary terms from
neighborhood
- TF · IDF from
neighborhood

- top k himportancei neighbors
himportancei = {degree,
RInDeg, indeg for each
religion r }

We apply the three proposed representativeness measures
on all users in our Twitter dataset together with the set of
labeled users shown in Table 1.
Table 3 lists the top ten users for each measure (with measure values given in parentheses). We can see that there are
overlapping top representative users across religions by indeg
and they include STcom, mrbrown, SoSinga..., Channel...
which are owned by popular bloggers, and news agencies in
Singapore (and are shown in italic fonts). RInDeg did a
great job recognizing the top representative users unique to
each religion, and these user accounts include: JosephPrince,
konghee, chcsg, nccsg which belong to popular church leaders and churches, FauzieLaily, Norfasarie, MediaCo... are
popular Muslim celebrities and news agencies, all based in
Singapore. This observation indicates the promising benefit
of using our proposed measure.

4.

Aggregated
- number of tweets
- number/fraction of tweets containing
selected terms for each religion r
- argmaxr indeg
- argmaxr outdeg
- argmaxr Nindeg
- argmaxr Noutdeg
- number/fraction of tweets from neighborhood
containing selected terms for each religion r
- avg/max/min of himportancei
of top k himportancei neighbors
himportancei = {degree,
RInDeg, indeg for each
religion r }

which includes the target user and other (possibly selected)
users connected to him. Assuming that homophily exists,
users in the neighborhood are expected to have similar features that enrich the target user representation. Table 4
shows the different combinations of feature categories.
Content Features We consider all original tweets written by the target user excluding the retweets. We call this
the user’s tweet document. Each tweet document is then represented as a bag of words and different content features are
constructed from the bag of words. We have considered two
types of content features for each word w, namely (a) TF
× IDF, and (b) binary presence of w. TF is the frequency
(in log form) of w in the tweet document d (T F (w, d) =
log(1 + f (w, d)) where f (w, d) is the frequency of word w
in d). IDF denotes the inverse document frequency of w
|D|
. D denotes the set of all user
(IDF (w) = log |{d∈D,w∈d}|
tweet documents. Because the results for TF×IDF consistently outperforms those for binary presence, only TF×IDF
results are reported.
Social Content Features. Beside the content features
from the user himself, content features of followees are also
important for determining user class label. We define a
Twitter user’s neighborhood to consist of himself and other
important users he follows. When a user follows important
religious accounts, the additional content features from these
accounts will enrich the content of the target user especially
for target user who is not actively tweeting.
In our dataset, a user can follow many followees (min = 0,
max = 16017, average = 290 for Christians, min = 0,
max = 11219, average = 309 for Muslims). We therefore chose for each user top k (k = 20) most important
followees. We can adopt several different ways of measuring
user importance. To obtain social content features, we first
combine the target user’s tweet document with those tweet

USER FEATURE REPRESENTATION

We represent each user using a vector of features which
in turn will be used in learning classifiers. We categorize
all the features by their data type as well as by the user(s)
from which the features are derived from. By considering
different combinations of data types and users, we obtain
a comprehensive feature set. By data type, we define: (a)
Content features: which are derived from textual content
of tweets; (b) Structural features: which are features derived from the connectivity of target user in relation with
his neighbors; (c) Aggregated features: which are features
derived from summarizing the content or structural features
of the target user.
The features can also categorized by the user(s) from which
the features are extracted. There are: (a) Self features
which are extracted from the target user’s data only; and (b)
Social features which are extracted from the neighborhood

1213

Table 7: Top 10 Selected Terms

Table 5: Social and Self Content Features (Precision/Recall/F1)
Self Content only
Social Content
Degree
(Nghbrs only)
RInDeg
Social Content
Degree
(Nghbrhd)
RInDeg

Christian
.792 .880 .834
.788 .871 .827
.792 .869 .829
.815 .897 .854
.830 .926 .876

Christian
psalm, hillsong, corinthians,
gospel, proverbs, testimony,
church, christ, amen, bible,

Muslim
.844 .775 .808
.814 .763 .788
.822 .792 .807
.879 .810 .843
.901 .837 .868

are indeed related to Christianity. The Muslim words are
in Malay because most Singaporean Muslims are ethnically
Malay and vice versa.
Evaluation on all users. We next evaluate our classification method on all the 110K+ users who have not been
assigned any religion labels. These users do not come with
ground truth labels. We therefore manually judged the top
50 scored users under the Christian class, and those top 50
scored users under the Muslim class. The manual judgement
was conducted by (1) examining religion related tweets generated by the users, (2) checking their profile pages including biography, recent tweets, and (3) checking his followings
and followers. The results show that these top scored users
are indeed assigned with the correct religions,i.e., the precision of the manual check is 100%. We also found some
non-Malay users (e.g., sirxjcz) who are muslim. While these
empirical results are encouraging, we shall conduct a larger
scale evaluation on this results in the future work.

Table 6: All Features using RInDeg as User Importance (Precision/Recall/F1)
Content
Self
Structure
Aggregated
Content
Social
Structure
Aggregated
Self + Social

Christian
.792 .880 .834
.690 .986 .812
.847 .955 .898
.830 .926 .876
.760 .981 .856
.769 .954 .852
.851 .976 .909

Muslim
.844 .775 .808
.960 .426 .590
.930 .777 .847
.901 .837 .868
.961 .598 .737
.924 .728 .814
.902 .859 .880

documents of his top k followees. The social content features
are then extracted from the combined tweet document.
Social Structure Features. Intuitively, a user’s choice
of followees may reveal her latent attribute. In particular,
we assume that religious users tend to follow users important to the religious community and they could be famous
pastors, preachers, and religious organizations. We therefore define social link features to be derived in two steps:
(1) find top k important followees in each religion (2) determine the presence or absence of a follow link to each of the
k important followees.

5.

Muslim
allah, insyaallah, masjid,
terawih, pakai, awak, pasal,
quran, insya, pulak

6.

CONCLUSIONS

As users generate content and follow others on social networks, they leave trace for inferring their latent attributes.
Differ from previous works which rely on text features only,
we use social links and neighbors to derive useful structure
features and social content features. Our proposed classification model with multiple types of features yields F1-score
larger than 0.8 for both Christian and Muslim using user
provided ground truth data as well as manually judged labeled users.

EXPERIMENTS

Evaluation on ground truth labels. In the first set of
experiments, we evaluate the performance of our prediction
method against the 1000+ ground truth labeled users. We
use WEKA [5], a machine learning software for computing
experiment metrics. Weka includes a wrapper of libSVM,
an implementation of SVM by Chang and Lin [4]. Using
10-fold cross validation, we obtain the performance of the
classifiers using different combinations of features metrics.
Our performance metrics are the standard precision, recall
and F1 scores for the Christian and Muslim classes.
Performance of using content features only comparing self
content with content generated in the neighborhood is depicted in Tables 5. The results show that social content from
neighbors only is comparable to self content and social content from neighborhood outperforms both self content and
social content from neighbors only. This observation is consistent with Al Zamal and colleagues’ findings [1]. Different
from their experiment, our proposed RInDeg outperforms
degree in deriving social content for the target users. We
shall therefore use RIndeg in the subsequent experiments.
The difference between social networks analysis and traditional text analysis lies in the integration of additional social information. Therefore, we are interested in investigate
the effect of integrating additional structural and aggregated
features. The results in Tables 6 show that combining both
kinds of features indeed improves classification performance.
The best F1 scores achieved for Christian and Muslim classes
are 0.909 and 0.880 respectively.
As SVM output feature weights, Table 2 shows top 10
induced linguistic terms for two classes. The Christian words

Acknowledgement
This work is supported by the National Research Foundation under its International Research Centre @ Singapore
Funding Initiative and administered by the IDM Programme
Office.

7.
REFERENCES
[1] F. Al Zamal, W. Liu, and D. Ruths. Homophily and
[2]

[3]
[4]
[5]

[6]
[7]

1214

latent attribute inference: Inferring latent attributes of
twitter users from neighbors. In ICWSM, 2012.
S. Bergsma, M. Dredze, B. Van Durme, T. Wilson, and
D. Yarowsky. Broadly improving user classification via
communication-based name and location clustering on
twitter. In NAACL, 2013.
A. Bhargava and G. Kondrak. Language identification
of names with svms. In HLT, 2010.
C.-C. Chang and C.-J. Lin. Libsvm: a library for
support vector machines. ACM TIST, 2(3):27, 2011.
M. Hall, E. Frank, G. Holmes, B. Pfahringer,
P. Reutemann, and I. H. Witten. The weka data mining
software: an update. ACM SIGKDD Explorations
Newsletter, 11(1):10–18, 2009.
M. Pennacchiotti and A.-M. Popescu. Democrats,
republicans and starbucks afficionados: user
classification in twitter. In SIGKDD, 2011.
D. Rao, D. Yarowsky, A. Shreevats, and M. Gupta.
Classifying latent user attributes in twitter. In Int’l
Workshop on Search & Mining User-generated
Contents.

