WenZher: Comprehensive Vertical Search for Healthcare
Domain
†

Liqiang Nie† , Tao Li§ , Mohammad Akbari† , Jialie Shen♯ , and Tat-Seng Chua†

National University of Singapore; ♯ Singapore Management University; § Zhejiang University

{nieliqiang, coylee917, jialie}@gmail.com; {akbari, chuats}@nus.edu.sg

ABSTRACT

Table 1: Data types involved in our system.
Data Types
Sources
Health Provider
WebMD, Yahoo! Health,
Released Data
MedicineNet, etc.
HealthTap, HaoDF,
Expert Generated Data
ChunYuHealth, etc.
Patientslikeme,
Patient Generated Data
Manbingyou, etc.

Online health seeking has transformed the way of health
knowledge exchange and reusability. The existing general
and vertical health search engines, however, just routinely
return lists of matched documents or question answer (QA)
pairs, which may overwhelm the seekers or not suﬃciently
meet the seekers’ expectations. Instead, our multilingual
system is able to return one multi-faceted answer that
is well-structured and precisely extracted from multiple
heterogeneous healthcare sources. Further, should the
seekers not be satisﬁed with the returned search results, our
system can automatically route the unsolved questions to
the professionals with relevant expertise.

or lists of QA pairs. Besides, the lists of answers are usually
relevant redundancy rather than diverse richness, they hence
may not meet the seekers’ demands.
To overcome the information over-loading, unstructured
and incomplete problems, this demonstration presents a
novel system, named WenZher. It automatically organizes
all the associated healthcare knowledge into a single view for
a given question. The comprehensive answer is an analytical
result of heterogeneous and multilingual data sources. These
sources can be broadly categorized into health provider
released data, expert generated data and patient generated
data, as summarized in Table 1. WenZher is also a social
platform and recommender system. It can propagate the
questions among askers’ connections and route the questions
to the knowledgeable persons with relevant expertise.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information
Search and Retrieval-Search Process

Keywords
Healthcare, Vertical Search, Structured Knowledge, Social
Platform

1. INTRODUCTION
As health consumers take more control over managing
their health, 72% of U.S. internet users have looked online
for health information to improve their health, wellness
and safety. This survey is conducted by the Pew Research
Center in January 2013 1 . It also reports that 77% of online
health seekers begin their exploration at commercial search
engines, such as Google, Bing and Yahoo. Another 13%
explore special healthcare-oriented sites, such as WebMD
and HealthTap. The remainders start search at social network or other non-mainstream retrieval forums. The seekers,
however, are frequently overwhelmed by the returned vast
quantity of unstructured information, i.e., lists of documents
1

2.

SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE

The architecture of WenZher is illustrated in Figure 1,
where the three knowledge bases play essential roles. To
construct these bases, WenZher ﬁrstly collected approximately one thousand and half healthcare topics and their
associated structured data from WebMD, Yahoo! Health
and other forums. These topics cover a wide range, including
pregnancy, cancer and endocrine. They are well-organized
and freely-released by professional organizations. Regarding
these topics as queries, WenZher crawled more than half
million high-quality QA pairs from popular healthcare QA
communities, such as HealthTap, HaoDF and Chunyuyisheng. The answers in these communities are generated
by professionals that oﬀer valuable references for the new
coming similar questions. In addition, WenZher gathered
more than 200 thousand patient generated e-records from
Patientslikeme and Manbingyou, and clustered them in
terms of healthcare topics. The statistical results of patient
generated data reveal the insights of patients from the same
group with similar conditions, and provide the health seekers
more knowledge about their health concerns.
To generate comprehensive results, WenZher performs
several high-order analytics. Here we brieﬂy introduce them.

http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2013/Health-online.aspx

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage, and that copies bear this notice and the full
citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must
be honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). Copyright is held by the
author/owner(s).
SIGIR’14, July 6–11, 2014, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.
ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2611176 .

1245

ComprehensiveResult
Question
Search

Question

x BestAnswer
x Overview
x Tests
x Treatments
x Medications
x Prevention
x SymptomDistribution
x TreatmentDistribution
x AgeDistribution
x GenderDistribution
x DiagnosisStatus
x SideEffects

ExpertGenerated
QAData

Predict
Healthcare
Topic

TopicMatch

Analyze
TopicͲrelated
Patients

Question:HowisAIDStransmitted?
TomZhang

Provider
ReleasedData

Patient
GeneratedData

Answer:AIDSisasyndromecausedbythevirus,HIV.ApersonmayhaveHIVbutnotAIDS,meaningthat
AIDS is a term used based on CD4 count or infections. HIV itself is transmitted by specific bodily fluids,
includingblood,semen,vaginalsecretions,andbreastmilk.
x Overview
x Tests
x SideEffects
x MedicalProcedures
x AlternativeProcedures
x PrescriptionMedication
1.indinavir(Crixivan)
INDINAVIR(inDINaveer)isanantiretroviralmedicine.ItisusedwithothermedicinestotreatHIV....More»
2.abacavir(Ziagen)
ABACAVIR(abaKAvir)isanantiretroviralmedicine.ItisusedwithothermedicinestotreatHIV....More»
...

Annotate

Post
Question

NOT

Satisfied?

Question
withTags

Return

YES
Route

End

Appropriate
Experts
Answer

Figure 1: Illustrative Architecture of our system.
Best Answer Selection WenZher supports multilingual
search, so it ﬁrst identiﬁes the type of question language. It
then locates the similar language-aware question by utilizing
the syntactic tree structure approach [2]. The expert crafted
answers of the ﬁrst positioned question are returned.
Healthcare Topic Prediction To better capture the semantics of healthcare data and reduce the feature dimension,
WenZher exploits the LDA-based topic-level features for
data representation instead of traditional low-level n-gram
features.
Feeding the features into various classiﬁers,
decision tree C4.5 achieves the best performance, slightly
less than 90%, compared to Naı̈ve Bayes, KNN and SVM.
Annotation with Terminologies Inspired by [1], WenZher
codes each new question with medical terminologies that
beneﬁts cross-system operability and inter-user reusability.
It ﬁrst locally extracts the medical concepts from the question itself and maps them to terminologies in the external
authenticated vocabularies, SNOMED-CT. Following that,
it globally learns the terminologies from neighbors.
Question Routing Wenzher models the matching relations
between given questions and doctors from the expertise and
attitude, respectively. It then adaptively fuses these two
factors via regression models.

Figure 2: Comprehensive vertical search results.
tion, those automatically recommended tags are manually
selectable via easily dragging.

4.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work was supported by NUS-Tsinghua Extreme
Search project under the grant number: R-252-300-001-490.

5.

REFERENCES

[1] L. Nie, Y.-L. Zhao, X. Wang, J. Shen, and T.-S. Chua. Learning
to recommend descriptive tags for questions in social forums.
TOIS, 2013.
[2] K. Wang, Z. Ming, and T.-S. Chua. A syntactic tree matching
approach to finding similar questions in community-based qa
services. In SIGIR, 2009.

3. DEMONSTRATION
WenZher is a social platform. It supports unidirectional
connections among patients and experts, which naturally
forms the tightly linked communities in terms of similar
healthcare concerns, habits and practices. The latest posted
questions and answers can be promptly updated and fed
within each community, so users can learn key knowledge
and oﬀer advice via their personalized pages.
Before adding a new question, WenZher encourages users
to perform vertical search over archived question-answer
pairs, which is a policy to constrain duplicate questions.
Figure 2 illustrates a comprehensive answer page for a given
question. This page contains the best answer selected from
multiple QA communities, organized knowledge from health
provider released authoritative sources, as well as statistics
from patient crowdsourcing forums.
WenZher allows users to post new questions, as shown
in Figure 3. Here media documents can be uploaded to
intuitively complement the question descriptions. In addi-

Figure 3: Question post interface of WenZher.

1246

