Just-for-Me: An Adaptive Personalization System for
Location-Aware Social Music Recommendation
Zhiyong Cheng

Jialie Shen

Tao Mei

School of Information Systems
Singapore Management University, Singapore

Microsoft Research
Beijing, China

{zy.cheng.2011, jlshen}@smu.edu.sg

tmei@microsoft.com

ABSTRACT

On the Server

Online or Local
Music Collection

Music Content Analysis

Location

In recent years, location-aware music recommendation is increasing in popularity, as more and more users consume
music on the move. In this demonstration, we present an
intelligent system, called Just-for-Me, to facilitate accurate
music recommendation based on where user presents. Our
system is developed based on a novel probabilistic generative
model, which can effectively integrate the location contexts
and global music popularity trends. This approach allows
us to gain more comprehensive modeling on user preference
and thus significantly enhances the music recommendation
performance.

Bag of Audio
Words

Playlist

Unified
Recommendation
Model

K-Means

Extraction

Audio
Features

Music Popularity Detection
Track
Popularity

Tweet Stream

Track
Detection

8VHUV¶/LVWHQLQJ5HFRUGV&ROOHFWLQJ
Listening
History

Users

Play Music Context

(user, context, song)

Figure 1: System architecture.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Query formulation, Search process; H.5.5 [Sound and Music Computing]: Systems

Keywords
Music Recommendation, Context-Aware, Social Trends

1.

INTRODUCTION

The ubiquity of intelligent mobile devices enables general
users to access large scale music content at anytime and anywhere. It poses a big challenge on identifying and retrieving
user’s favorite songs under the dynamically changed contexts when on the move, as users’ music preferences could
be influenced by various contextual factors [4].
Traditional music recommender systems recommend music by matching music items with user’s long-term music
preferences, while ignoring the fact that user’s short-term
music preferences can be influenced by many physical environment related contexts, such as local social activities/events
or geo-location. A typical example is that a user may prefer energetic music in gym while peaceful music in library.
On the other hand, the growing pervasiveness of various
user-generate content (UGC) channels (e.g., microblogging

service) enables different kinds of users to express and share
their opinions and comments about artists and music. At
the same time, a large number of views have a significant
influence on users’ music preferences. How to integrate the
effects of UGC to facilitate accurate music recommendation
is still an open research question. In recent years, extensive
efforts have been dedicated to the development of contextaware music recommender systems (CAMRSs) [4]. However, very few location-aware music recommendation systems have been reported [2]. Furthermore, to the best of
our knowledge, none of existing CAMRSs has considered
the effects of music social popularity trends.
Motivated by above concerns, we develop a location-aware
music recommendation system - Just-for-Me, which effectively integrates both location context and the global music popularity trends to facilitate more accurate and robust
music recommendation [3]. A unified probabilistic generative model is developed to combine both collaborative and
content-based recommendation techniques. In this demonstration, we show the superiority of Just-for-Me on recommendation accuracy and robustness at various venues (e.g.,
library and gym) and present the usability of the system on
mobile phones.

2.

JUST-FOR-ME OVERVIEW

The system applies server-client architecture - in server
side, the recommendation model is trained and used to generate the playlists for users at different locations; and in
client side, the corresponding recommended playlist with respect to the received location information1 is presented to

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage, and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be
honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). Copyright is held by the
author/owner(s).
SIGIR’14, July 6–11, 2014, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.
ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2611187.

1

In current stage, the system requires the user to specify the
location. In the future development, an automatically place
detection module will be added into the system.

1267

Table 1: Comparison of Recommendation Accuracy

the user. As illustrated in Figure 1, Just-for-Me consists of
four major modules and their details are as follows:

P@10
R1
R2
R3

• Music Content Analysis. This module analyzes the
audio content of each song and represents each song as
a “Bag-of-Audio-Words”. Each audio word is a representative short audio frame. K-means is used to generate audio words based on the audio features of each
frame.

3.2

• Users’ Listening Records Collecting. It focuses
on collecting and managing users’ music listening records
along with the use of the system.
• Unified Recommendation Model. In this module, the three-way aspect model is extended to incorporate the location context and music popularity [3].
An observation in the model is a quadruple (u, l, s, w),
which represents a user u listening to a song s with
the audio content w (an audio word) at location l.
The model combines the music popularity with the
occurrence times of observations, so that more popular songs have higher probabilities to be recommended
to users [3].
As shown above, the music content, music popularity and
users’ listening history are seamlessly integrated into the
recommendation model. In the model, a set of latent topics is used to associate users’ contextual music tastes with
music contents. These latent topics are treated as the intrinsic factors to explain why users prefer certain music content at a place during a particular time period. The server
updates the recommendation system every week to closely
track users’ locational music preferences with the dynamics
of music popularity trends.

DEMONSTRATION

In this demonstration, we reveal different advantages and
salient features of Just-for-Me system: effectiveness, robustness and intelligent user interface.

3.1

Gym
0.3333
0.3533
0.4333

Library
0.3333
0.4167
0.6000

Office
0.3000
0.3400
0.4167

Transport.
0.3333
0.4167
0.4900

demonstrates its effectiveness and robustness on locationaware music recommendation. The mean relative (absolute) improvements (across five venues) on P@10 are 43.17%
(14.13%) and 24.13% (9.24%) over R1 and R2, respectively.

• Music Popularity Detection. This module tracks
the dynamics of music popularity trends via analyzing music-related tweets. By using Twitter Streaming
API, tweets with hashtag #nowplaying and #np are
collected in real time. The popularity of each song is
computed based on the number of tweets mentioned
the song.

3.

Canteen
0.3333
0.3513
0.4000

Result Presentation. A straightforward presentation
strategy is to present the recommended songs to users in a
sorted list, which ranks the songs in a descending order of
relevance scores estimated by the recommendation model.
A problem of this strategy is that similar playlists will be
recommended to a user for a particular venue within a short
time period. As a result, users may feel boring about the recommended playlists. To improve the user experience, Justfor-Me provides an interactive strategy to generate diverse
playlists for a venue. Specifically, the artists of the top recommended songs are presented to the users in an undirected
graph (connected based on the similarities between artists).
The community (based on similarity), genre and popularity of each artist are shown to the user. Users can select
the artists they prefer in the moment based on artists’ similarities, genres and popularities. The songs of the selected
artists are then sorted and presented to the users. This
strategy can greatly increase the diversity of recommended
playlists and better satisfy users’ local music needs, because
the users themselves select the artists and these artists’ songs
are very probably suitable for the current venue.
Music Annotation. Just-for-Me implicitly records users’
listening logs, including whether a song is skipped, how many
times of a song and the duration of a song is played in each
time in a particular place. The system also enables users
to explicitly label the songs they like at certain venues. To
facilitating the labeling process, three modes are designed to
generate the candidate songs: (1) songs of certain artists,
(2) the most popular songs in current, and (3) the recommended songs for a venue based on the numbers of users
who like the songs at the venue. For the new users without
any records, the three modes are also used to present the
initial recommended results for them.

4.

Effectiveness and Robustness

User Interface

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This research study is partially supported by the Microsoft
Research grant: My Mobile Music: Towards Cloud based
Intelligent Music Recommendation on the Move.

We conduct a user study to demonstrate the superiority
of Just-for-Me on recommendation performance from two
aspects - effectiveness and robustness. In the user study,
Just-for-Me is compared to two competitors on recommending songs to users at five common venues: canteen, gym,
library, office and transportation. The first competitor (R1)
uses a random recommendation strategy and the second
competitor (R2) adopts the popular contextual pre-filtering
recommendation method [1]. The evaluation metric is Precision@n (P@n). For the information of experimental data
and methodology, please refer to [3]. Table 1 presents the
mean P@10 of all subjects over five different venues.
Just-for-Me (R3 in the table) outperforms the competitors across the five places significantly and consistently, which

5.

REFERENCES

[1] G. Adomavicius and A. Tuzhilin. Context-aware
recommender systems. In Recommender systems handbook,
pages 217–253. Springer, 2011.
[2] M. Braunhofer, M. Kaminskas, and F. Ricci. Location-aware
music recommendation. IJMIR, 2(1):31–44, 2013.
[3] Z. Cheng and J. Shen. Just-for-me: An adaptive
personalization system for location-aware social music
recommendation. In ACM ICMR, 2014.
[4] M. Kaminskas and F. Ricci. Contextual music information
retrieval and recommendation: State of the art and
challenges. Computer Science Review, 6(2):89–119, 2012.

1268

