A Perspective-Aware Approach to Search: Visualizing
Perspectives in News Search Results
Muhammad Atif Qureshi†‡ , Colm O’Riordan† , Gabriella Pasi‡
‡

†
CIRG, NUIG, Ireland
IRLAB, DISCO, UNIMIB, Italy

muhammad.qureshi@nuigalway.ie
ABSTRACT

The proposed system allows the user to specify an additional input perspective terms/phrase along with the query
through a standard type-keywords-in-entry-form interface
(see Figure 1). Note that this is not equivalent to appending
the query with the perspective terms/phrase as the perspective may not necessarily be a part of the user’s search intent. However, there may be a bias in the result set towards
a certain “perspective”; and hence, we propose perspectiveaware search as a means to investigate and analyze a leaning
towards an agenda. We explain through the following motivating example: consider a case in which a user wishes to
find information about a certain event (say, a bomb blast
in a certain region). The search results returned may be
polarized instead of focusing on factual aspects i.e., relating to a certain race, ethnicity, or political movement which
caused violence. This can prompt a user to explicitly evaluate a move from objective factual reporting to subjective
reporting within the top results.
Our system utilizes knowledge from Wikipedia2 to make
conceptual sense of the perspective terms/phrase. This knowledge does not modify the query (as would an additional
query term) but is instead used to highlight the presence of
a perspective in the result set.

The result set from a search engine for any user’s query
may exhibit an inherent perspective due to issues with the
search engine or issues with the underlying collection. This
demonstration paper presents a system that allows users to
specify at query time a perspective together with their query.
The system then presents results from well-known search
engines with a visualization of the results which allows the
users to quickly surmise the presence of the perspective in
the returned set.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Search process; H.5.2 [User Interfaces]: Natural language

Keywords
Perspective; Wikipedia; News Search

1.

INTRODUCTION

There have been notable efforts in the information retrieval research community to provide users with an insight
into the relationship between the query and the result set [1].
Recent research into exploratory search systems [2] recommends the integration of cognitive aspects within the information retrieval process. However, current information retrieval systems do not support means to investigate “potential bias” (an essential cognitive element) towards a certain
perspective introduced during the search process1 . According to the Oxford Dictionary, the definition of perspective
is as follows: “Perspective is a particular attitude towards
or way of regarding something.” In line with this we argue
for incorporating the essential cognitive element of “perspective” within the search engine interface thereby introducing
“perspective-aware” search in this demonstration paper.

Figure 1: Perspective-Aware Search Entry Form

2.

1
The “potential bias” may be introduced due to issues with
the search engine itself or with the underlying collection.

SYSTEM DESCRIPTION

Fig. 2 shows the architecture of our system. The user enters the query together with the perspective phrase and the
query is fed to the underlying information retrieval system
which generates a ranked list of documents. The document
extractor then forwards the content of the documents to the
tokenizer and the extracted tokens along with the input perspective are fed into our perspective scoring system which

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage, and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be
honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). Copyright is held by the
author/owner(s).
SIGIR’14, July 6–11, 2014, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.
ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2611184.

2
An external and collaboratively created knowledge resource
which is less likely to be biased in a given direction.

1261

uses our custom-built WikiMadeEasy API3 . The perspective scoring system scores each token with respect to the
perspective entered by the user and, the score of each token
is aggregated to produce a perspective score for a document
in the ranked list returned by the information retrieval system(s). Finally, the ranked list returned by the information
retrieval system(s) and the perspective scores of tokens &
documents returned by the scoring system is returned as
output to generate the HTML result page.
Figure 3: Perspective Information Added to Snippet

Figure 4: Perspective-Aware Search Graphical Comparison of Results Returned by Different Engines

Figure 2: Perspective-Aware Search Overall Architecture

The perspective scoring system uses the Wikipedia categoryarticle structure to score the amount of content present inside a document with respect to the input perspective. The
underlying perspective computation algorithm makes use
of the title (or redirect) of a Wikipedia article for matching perspective terms/phrase, then utilizes the categories4
and sub-categories5 to a depth count of two of the matched
Wikipedia article. We refer to these categories related to the
perspective under investigation as RP (i.e., it contains all
related categories of the perspective from depth count zero
to two). Next, we retrieve the set of all articles within the
Wikipedia category set RP (we refer to this set as ArticlesRP ).
Finally, all categories associated with these articles are retrieved. The extracted tokens from a document which are
contained in ArticlesRP are called matched phrases (phrases
defining perspective). We use these matched phrases to
calculate the perspective score. The following summarizes
important factors which contribute in calculating the perspective score for a token using Wikipedia category-article
structure: 1) The significance of category depth at which a
matched phrase occurs; the deeper the match occurs in the
taxonomy the less its significance to the perspective under
investigation, 2) The significance of a matched phrase’s categories corresponding to the perspective under investigation.
The more categories of matched phrase in RP , the higher
the significance related to the perspective, and 3) The significance of the phrase itself which is a combination of phrase
word length and frequency of the phrase within the document.
3
http://bit.ly/1eMADG9, we aim to release the API as
an open source Wikipedia tool to facilitate easy access to
Wikipedia data and graph structure.
4
These are basically the categories of a perspective phrase’s
Wikipedia article i.e., categories at the depth zero.
5
Each Wikipedia category can have an arbitrary number of
subcategories

Finally, for user convenience, we have provided a perspective autocompletion feature within the system which simplifies the perspective input process for the user.

3.

DEMONSTRATION FOR NEWS DOMAIN

The perspective-aware search prototype we describe in
this demonstration paper is tailored for news search and
fetches news search results from three search engines (i.e.,
Yahoo!, Google and Bing). The video of the demonstration
can be accessed at http://youtu.be/mPO763z6H4Y. The
system provides additional information within snippets of
returned news search results where the perspective score for
each result together with its perspective rank is displayed6
as the snippet in Figure 3 shows. Furthermore, the search
results of each search engine are displayed in a side-by-side
manner. The system also employs visualization techniques
(i.e., bar charts and line charts) to display the comparative
perspective scores. Figure 4 shows the visualizations incorporated in the system as they appear on the search results
page giving the user further insights into the result sets of
major search engines together with the web sites from which
the result sets are retrieved. A few screenshots of the system are available at http://bit.ly/Mpetmc. An interface
such as the proposed one can be particularly useful in exploratory tasks such as those commonly encountered in the
news domain by journalists, media studies researchers or by
end-users.

4.

REFERENCES

[1] M. A. Hearst. Search User Interfaces. Cambridge University
Press, New York, NY, USA, 1st edition, 2009.
[2] R. W. White and R. A. Roth. Exploratory search: Beyond the
query-response paradigm. Synthesis Lectures on Information
Concepts, Retrieval, and Services, 1(1):1–98, 2009.

6
It is the ordering by perspective scores for the top ten results.

1262

