ExperTime: Tracking Expertise over Time
Jan Rybak

Krisztian Balog

Kjetil Nørvåg

Norwegian University of
Science and Technology

University of Stavanger

Norwegian University of
Science and Technology

jan.rybak@idi.ntnu.no

krisztian.balog@uis.no

ABSTRACT

kjetil.norvag@idi.ntnu.no

This paper presents ExperTime, a web-based system for tracking
expertise over time. We visualize a person’s expertise profile on
a timeline, where we detect and characterize changes in the focus
or topics of expertise. It is possible to zoom in on a given time
period in order to examine the underlying data that is used as supporting evidence. It is also possible to perform visual and quantitative comparison of two arbitrarily selected time periods in a highly
interactive environment. We invite profile owners to evaluate and
fine-tune their profiles, and to leave feedback.

We build on prior work [3] and propose to use domain-specific
topic taxonomies that enable us to capture and conveniently visualize a person’s expertise at any given point in time. By displaying
a series of profile snapshots on a timeline, we can have a complete
overview of the development of expertise over time. In addition,
we identify and characterize important changes that occur in these
profiles. Profile owners are invited to refine the profiles we automatically generated for them and are encouraged to leave feedback.
The system is available at http://bit.ly/expertime. A
short video tutorial introducing the main functionality can be found
at http://bit.ly/expertime-video.

Categories and Subject Descriptors

2.

H.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: H.3.3 Information Search
and Retrieval

Publications are key indicators of expertise in an academic context. Bibliographic databases, like DBLP, have been used to mine
information networks, including clustering, ranking and profiling
of conferences and authors based on research sub-fields [5, 6]. Bibliographic collections have also been used for expert finding [2,
4]. ArnetMiner [6], a tool for automatic extraction of information
about researchers, addresses, among other things, the problem of
analyzing expertise evolution over time. Their solution, however,
is based on keyword statistics projected on a time axis and lacks
higher organizational structure.

Keywords
Temporal expertise profiling, expert profiling, expertise retrieval

1.

INTRODUCTION

Over the past decade, the increased availability of online evidence that can be traced and mined has led to a renewed interest
in two types of expertise retrieval system: expert finding systems
(to locate individuals who are experts on a given topic) and expert
profiling systems (to describe the expertise of a given person) [1].
In practice, the two tasks—finding and profiling—are strongly connected; once potential expert candidates are identified, a closer look
into their profile is needed before they are actually contacted.
Our focus lies in two important issues related to expertise profiling that have received little attention so far. First, the expertise of a
person on a given topic should be considered in context; that context is comprised of the larger landscape of knowledge areas within
the domain and of the distribution of the person’s expertise across.
Second, expertise is not static, it changes over time. In scientific
fields that are rapidly developing, such as computer science, “once
an expert always an expert” does not hold. Therefore, it is vital to
be able to track changes in a person’s expertise over time.

3.

RELATED WORK

DATA AND METHODS

In this section we briefly introduce the temporal expertise profiling method underlying our system. For a full account we refer the reader to [3]. We model the expertise of an individual as
a series of timestamped hierarchical profiles (referred to as profile snapshots from now on). We assume that a (domain-specific)
taxonomy of expertise areas is provided and weigh nodes in this
tree-shaped hierarchy based on documents supporting evidence of
expertise. This representation not only allows us to measure how
broad, narrow, or diverse one’s expertise is, but also facilitates the
formal comparison and characterization of changes between two
profile snapshots. Changes are divided into two main groups, depending on which level of the topic hierarchy is affected: changes
in the field of research (i.e., top-level nodes) and changes in the topics of research (i.e., lower-level nodes). Our method has two main
parameters: (1) the decay factor controls the rate at which expertise
“fades away,” and (2) the focus threshold sets the sensitivity of the
method to changes. We allow the user to tune these values (see §4).
In this work, we focus on the computer science domain, for two
reasons. One, we are reasonably familiar with the domain, and,
two, there are publicly available sources of publications and topic
classification systems in this area. Specifically, we use DBLP as
our bibliographic database and the ACM 1998 Computing Classification System as our taxonomy. We use the provided ACM classi-

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage, and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be
honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). Copyright is held by the
author/owner(s).
SIGIR’14, July 6–11, 2014, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.
ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2611190 .

1273

controlling instrument—the page is updated upon the selection of years. Detected changes in one’s expertise are displayed below the timeline as small icons.
(B) Supporting documents We present a list of publications, categorized according to the topic taxonomy. Users have the
option to change the category assignments for each paper if
they feel that it is not classified correctly. It is also possible
to promote publications that are deemed more important than
others by giving them a “star.”
(C) Top categories We show the list of top-ranked categories from
the topic taxonomy, along with the estimated importance of
each category (subdivided into past period and current year).
Similarly to publications, categories can also be promoted if
the user believes that her contribution is not projected correctly in the category’s score.
(D) Detailed profile snapshot(s) The largest area is occupied by
the visualization of a profile snaphot—a tree of categories
with branches weighted according to the person’s expertise
on the corresponding topics. It is also possible to have two
years selected for comparison on the timeline (A), in which
case the corresponding profile snaphots are visualized by two
semitransparent overlaying tree graphs (so that the user can
more easily identify differences).

5.

The system consists of two main building blocks. The back-end
part, using mostly Java and MySQL technologies, is responsible for
the extraction, processing, and storage of information. The frontend is an HTML5 website using servlets for communication with
the server and JavaScript with additional libraries, such as jQuery
and D3.js, for visualization and interactivity.

Figure 1: An example expertise profile in ExperTime.
fication, where available, and use an automatic classifier for the rest
of the publications. (We offer our users the possibility to refine this
categorization.) Note that our the system is not tailored to any specific domain; topic taxonomies are available for other disciplines
as well (e.g., PubMed in medicine), which makes our system easily
extensible to other fields.

4.

IMPLEMENTATION

6.

CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we have described a demonstration of a temporal
expertise profiling system, called ExperTime. We presented our
initial motivation, used methods and underlying data, as well as the
main functionality of the system. The next step on our research
agenda is the evaluation of temporal expertise profiles. This is a
challenging problem for two reasons: (1) the notions of focus and
topic changes are subjective and are likely to vary from person to
person, and (2) the complexity of the task is beyond the point where
TREC-like benchmark evaluations are feasible. The feedback we
plan to obtain with the ExperTime system, both implicit and explicit, will provide invaluable information to guide the development
of appropriate evaluation methodology.

FUNCTIONALITY

A number of researcher profiles have already been processed and
made available. Those who are not yet in our system can sign up
and claim their profiles. Figure 1 displays an example profile. We
distinguish between two user modes: (1) the user is only a viewer
of a profile, and is not allowed to make changes, and (2) the user
is the owner of the profile. In the latter case, the user is allowed
(and encouraged) to change the settings and to adjust her expertise
profile to what she believes is best reflecting reality. A key design
objective was that such changes shall take effect immediately, i.e.,
we update the underlying model when the parameter settings (such
as the decay factor and focus threshold) or the data (assignments
of publications to categories and weighting of publications and/or
categories) are modified. When displaying a profile, we indicate
whether it is an automatically generated one or one that has already
been curated by its owner. Next, we briefly discuss the main components of the interface, indicated with circled letters on Figure 1.

7.

REFERENCES

[1] K. Balog, Y. Fang, M. de Rijke, P. Serdyukov, and L. Si. Expertise
retrieval. Found. Trends Inf. Retr., 6(2-3):127–256, 2012.
[2] H. Deng, I. King, and M. R. Lyu. Formal models for expert finding on
dblp bibliography data. In Proceedings of ICDM’08, 2008.
[3] J. Rybak, K. Balog, and K. Nørvåg. Temporal expertise profiling. In
Proceedings of ECIR’14, 2014.
[4] E. Smirnova and K. Balog. A user-oriented model for expert finding.
In Proceedings of ECIR’11, 2011.
[5] Y. Sun, T. Wu, Z. Yin, H. Cheng, J. Han, X. Yin, and P. Zhao.
BibNetMiner: Mining bibliographic information networks. In
Proceedings of SIGMOD’08, 2008.
[6] J. Tang, J. Zhang, L. Yao, J. Li, L. Zhang, and Z. Su. ArnetMiner:
Extraction and mining of academic social networks. In Proceedings of
SIGKDD’08, 2008.

(A) Timeline We create yearly profile snaphots and display them
on a timeline. Each year is expressed as a tree (see §3). By
clicking on the snapshots, the user can select one or two years
for more details. The timeline can be understood as the main

1274

