Entity-Based Retrieval
Hadas Raviv
Faculty of Industrial Engineering and Management
Technion, Haifa 32000, Israel
hadasrv@tx.technion.ac.il

ABSTRACT
We address the core challenge of the entity retrieval task:
ranking entities in response to a query by their presumed
relevance to the information need that the query represents.
As an initial research direction we explored two models for
entity ranking that were evaluated using the INEX entity
ranking dataset and which posted promising performance.
A natural future direction to explore is how to generalize
these models to address various types of information needs
that are associated with entities.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.3.3 [Information Search
and Retrieval]: Retrieval models
Keywords: entity retrieval, markov random fields, cluster ranking

1.

INTRODUCTION

The ad hoc retrieval task in information retrieval (IR) is
to answer a user’s information need, represented by a query,
by retrieving relevant information satisfying that need. Traditionally, this task is handled by ranking a list of documents in response to a query. Recently, it has been observed
that for many queries, named entities (e.g. people, organizations) better satisfy the user’s information need than full
documents [4]. This observation drove forward work on the
entity retrieval task. The task is focused on queries that are
better addressed by entities than by documents. The goal
is ranking entities in response to such queries.
In the last decade several entity retrieval tasks have been
studied. Examples include the tasks of retrieving entities
of specific types (e.g., experts [2]), from specific domains
(e.g., enterprise [2] , Wikipedia [3]) and retrieving entities
that satisfy specific types of information needs (e.g., relation
retrieval [1]).
These entity retrieval tasks pose two major challenges.
The first challenge is entity representation. Entities are complex objects that can be associated with a varying number
of properties (e.g., type, name) as well as defined by different identifiers (e.g., Web homepage, Wikipedia page, URI)

in various domains. As a result, there is no single definition
of the object (entity) that should be retrieved.
The second challenge is devising generic entity ranking
models that utilize various entity representation approaches
and address various types of entity related information needs.
Many entity ranking algorithms are less generic than document ranking algorithms, and are often adapted to a specific
corpus, task or entity representation.
We define an entity oriented query as a query for which
the underlying information need is better satisfied by entities
than by documents. In our research we intend to develop
retrieval models for addressing such queries. Specifically, we
intend to address the second challenge discussed above and
utilize a generic entity representation for developing generic
methods for entity retrieval.
The research direction just described is very broad. As
a first step, we focused on a specific task. The goal is to
rank Wikipedia entities in response to a query by defining
a criteria that these entities should fulfil. We developed
two ranking models. The first is based on the Markov Random Fields (MRF) framework [6]. The second is based on
a cluster-based retrieval approach [5]. These models were
evaluated using the INEX entity ranking dataset [3], aimed
at retrieving entities in Wikipedia, and showed promising
results.
Our plans are to generalize the MRF and cluster-based
models for addressing various types of entity oriented queries
in various types of collections. Specifically, we intend to
explore the connection between entity related information
used for ranking and the type of query addressed.

Acknowledgements. This research is based upon joint work
with Oren Kurland and David Carmel.

2.

REFERENCES

[1] K. Balog, P. Serdyukov, and A. P. de Vries. Overview of the
TREC 2011 entity track. In Proc. of TREC, 2012.
[2] K. Balog, P. Thomas, N. Craswell, I. Soboroff, P. Bailey, and
A. P. De Vries. Overview of the trec 2008 enterprise track.
Technical report, DTIC Document, 2008.
[3] G. Demartini, T. Iofciu, and A. P. De Vries. Overview of the
inex 2009 entity ranking track. In Proc. of INEX, pages
254–264, 2010.
[4] J. Pound, P. Mika, and H. Zaragoza. Ad-hoc object retrieval in
the web of data. In Proc. of WWW, pages 771–780, 2010.
[5] H. Raviv, D. Carmel, and O. Kurland. A ranking framework for
entity oriented search using markov random fields. In Proc. of
JIWES, page 1, 2012.
[6] H. Raviv, O. Kurland, and D. Carmel. The cluster hypothesis for
entity oriented search. In Proc. of SIGIR, pages 841–844, 2013.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage, and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be
honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). Copyright is held by the
author/owner(s).
SIGIR’14, July 6–11, 2014, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.
ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2610378 .

1277

