An Interactive Interface for Visualizing Events on Twitter
Andrew J. McMinn∗, Daniel Tsvetkov, Tsvetan Yordanov, Andrew Patterson, Rrobi Szk,
Jesus A. Rodriguez Perez, Joemon M. Jose†
School of Computing Science
University of Glasgow
Glasgow, Scotland
a.mcminn.1@research.gla.ac.uk∗ , joemon.jose@glasgow.ac.uk†

ABSTRACT
In recent years, social media has become one of the most
popular tools for discovering and following breaking news
and ongoing events. However tools and interfaces have lagged
behind users’ expectations, with current tools making it difficult to discover new events and failing to provide a solution
to the problem of information overload. We have developed
an interactive interface for visualizing events, backed by a
state-of-the-art event detection approach, which is able to
detect, track and summarize events in real-time. Our interface provides up-to-the-second information about ongoing
events in an easy to understand manner, including category
information, temporal distribution, and location information – all of which was previously unobtainable in real-time.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.5.0 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: General
Figure 1: The main screen, showing a grid of the
most recent and significant events.

Keywords
Event Detection; Event Visualization; Social Media

1.

tool which can both detect events and present event-based
social media posts in an effective and easy-to-use manner.
Due to its real-time nature, Twitter is a particularly popular source of information about ongoing real-world events,
however finding information about an event requires a great
deal of effort from users. Currently, users must manually create a list of search terms and use Twitter’s search interface
to follow an event, or use event-specific hashtags to follow
events using services such as Seen1 . These interfaces require
the user to be aware of the event in advance, and focus on
presenting tweets without any summarisation or analysis of
the event itself. TweetDesk solves these problems by automatically identifying interesting events in real-time, and
gives a detailed overview as well as summarised information
about events in an clean and easy-to-use interface.

INTRODUCTION

The use of social media as a source of information about
ongoing real-world events has exploded in recent years. Journalists have turned to social media as a tool for finding
events which have yet to be reported elsewhere, whilst other
users are trying to follow ongoing events for up-to-the-second
information about what is happening. The demands of users
have changed greatly, however the interfaces and tools to
provide event-based information have lagged behind, remaining mostly the same for a number of years. Some attempts
have been made to improve this, however these have been
aimed mostly at detecting events [3], notifying users of specific types of event (such as emergency events [4]) or providing specific types of information about an event (such a
spacio-temporal information [2, 1]). There has yet to be a

2.

TWEETDESK

TweetDesk’s main interface displays a list of current and
popular events using a grid of event cards. As shown in
Figure 1, each card consists of an automatically generated
event headline, pictures taken from tweets about the event
and (where possible) information about who was involved in
the event, where it took place, and when it happened. Event

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author. Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’14, July 6–11, 2014, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.
ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2611189.

1

1271

http://seen.co

cards are ranked by a number of features, with the highest
ranking and most popular events allowed more space at the
top of the list, while smaller and less significant events are
given a lesser presence.
Each of the events is classified into one of 7 categories
using the uClassify API2 , and users can browse events by
category or by time period. Additionally, TweetDesk is able
to filter events based upon a users geographical location to
provide more personalized results.

2.1

Visualizing Events

Clicking on an event card takes the user to the event’s
summary page, as shown in Figure 2, and allows the user
to view detailed information and content summaries for the
specific event. The summaries page aims to provide the
user with the latest and most useful information about an
event, and provides an alternative to reading hundreds or
thousands of redundant tweets. In particular, the summaries
page provides the following information, which is updated in
real-time as new tweets are posted and as new information
becomes available:
• Event Statistics – General statistics about the event,
such as the number of users discussing the event and
which hashtags are being used to describe it.
• Tweets – A set of “top tweets” automatically selected
to summarise key information about the event.
• Headline – A short headline-styled summary of the
event.
• People & Organizations – Background information about
the people and organization involved in the event, pulled
from Freebase.
• Locations – A geographical map with details of the
locations involved in the event, as well as a second map
showing the location of geo-tagged tweets discussing
the event.
• Timeline – Temporal information showing how the volume of discussion has changed over time.
• Links – Links to news articles about the event extracted from tweets.
Figure 2: The event dashboard, which gives detailed
information and content summaries for an event.

• Pictures – Pictures extracted from tweets, giving a visual clue as to what is happening.

3.

4.

CONCLUSION

TweetDesk provides a unique way of visualizing and summarizing events using social media posts. It allows for an interactive investigation into events, and can provide in-depth
information about an event which cannot easily be found
using traditional social media interfaces. TweetDesk allows
journalists and users to find out what is happening around
the world, as it happens, and in a fully automated fashion.
TweetDesk can be used to either compliment traditional social media interfaces or as a standalone replacement for those
who only use social media to follow events.

3.1

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the European Community’s
Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant
agreement 288024 (LiMoSINe project).
2

http://uclassify.com/

1272

REFERENCES

[1] H. Abdelhaq, C. Sengstock, and M. Gertz. Eventweet:
Online localized event detection from twitter. Proc.
VLDB Endow., 6(12):1326–1329, Aug. 2013.
[2] R. Li, K. H. Lei, R. Khadiwala, and K. C.-C. Chang.
Tedas: A twitter-based event detection and analysis
system. Data Engineering, International Conference on,
0:1273–1276, 2012.
[3] S. Petrović, M. Osborne, and V. Lavrenko. Streaming
first story detection with application to twitter. In
Human Language Technologies 2010, HLT ’10, pages
181–189, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 2010. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
[4] J. Yin, S. Karimi, B. Robinson, and M. Cameron. Esa:
Emergency situation awareness via microbloggers. In
Proceedings of the 21st ACM International Conference
on Information and Knowledge Management, CIKM
’12, pages 2701–2703, New York, NY, USA, 2012. ACM.

