Cluster Links Prediction for Literature Based Discovery
Using Latent Structure and Semantic Features
Yakub Sebastian
School of Information Technology
Monash University Malaysia
Bandar Sunway, Malaysia

yakub.sebastian@monash.edu
The second problem is to predict the future formation of links
between the nodes in previously disconnected clusters. We
introduce a novel algorithm, Latent Domain Similarity (LDS),
which uses combinations of semantic features (e.g. distribution of
technical terms in titles and abstracts) and structural features (e.g.
cited references, citing articles) of two or more articles in order
to infer shared latent domains between them. We assume that
while two sets of literature could have been published separately
in two seemingly unrelated fields, it is possible that they share
many similar domains previously unknown to researchers in each
field. The goal is to explore whether these shared latent domains
correlate with the probability of previously disconnected clusters
to form future citation links with each other.

ABSTRACT
The potential impact of a scientific article has a significant
correlation with its ability to establish novel connections between
pre-existing knowledge [1-2]. Discovering hidden connections
between the existing scientific literature is an interesting yet
highly challenging information retrieval problem [2]. Literature
based discovery (LBD) uses computational algorithms to
discover potential hidden connections between previously
disconnected sets of literature [3]. Most of the current LBD
methods focus on analyzing latent semantic features in texts but
are usually computationally demanding. In particular, they do not
aim at predicting novel discovery links between clusters of
literature.
Combining latent semantic and structural features of
literature is a promising yet unexplored LBD approach. This
approach is potentially scalable and effective. For example,
incorporating structural features of Web pages has increased the
effectiveness of many large-scale IR systems [4]. The
bibliographic structures of scientific papers make it possible to
view a corpus of literature as a complex network of nodes
(articles) and links (citation relationships) in which recognizable
communities or clusters can be observed, each representing a
distinct research field [5]. Consequently, potential hidden
connections between disparate fields might be found from among
non-overlapping clusters that do not have any existing link
between their members yet exhibit a high propensity to converge
in the future.
This work approaches LBD as a cluster link prediction
problem. We view disjoint literature sets as disjoint clusters in
citation networks. Our method searches for hidden connections
between disjoint clusters whose member nodes show high
probabilities in forming future links. To this end, we address two
research problems. The first problem is to group papers into
clusters of distinct research areas. We compare the accuracy of
well-known community detection algorithms, such as LOUVAIN
and INFOMAP [5], in detecting research field clusters from
citation networks of physics literature. We evaluate the quality of
these clusters using purity, Rand Index, F-measure and
Normalized Mutual Information [5-6]. Since ground truth
communities are usually unknown, we also propose using
alternative textual coherence measures such as Jensen-Shannon
divergence [7].

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Clustering, Search
Process, Selection Process

Keywords
literature-based discovery; community detection; cluster link
prediction

REFERENCES
[1] Uzzi, B., Mukherjee, S., Stringer, M. and Jones, B. 2013.
Atypical combinations and scientific impact. Science. 342,
6157, 468-472.
[2] Swanson, D. R. 1991. Complementary structures in disjoint
science literature. In Proceedings of the 14th SIGIR
Conference (Chicago, Illinois, USA, October 13 – 16,
1991), ACM, 280-289.
[3] Smalheiser, N. R. 2012. Literature-based discovery: Beyond
the ABCs. Journal of the American Society for Information
Science and Technology. 63, 2, 218-224.
[4] Kleinberg, J. M. 1999. Authoritative sources in a
hyperlinked environment. Journal of the Association for
Computing Machinery. 46, 5, 604-632.
[5] Fortunato, S. 2010. Community detection in graphs. Physics
Reports. 486, 3, 75-174.
[6] Manning, C. D., Raghavan, P. and Schütze, H. 2008.
Introduction to information retrieval. Cambridge University
Press.
[7] Boyack, K. W., Newman, D., Duhon, R. J., Klavans, R.,
Patek, M., Biberstine, J. R., Schijvenaars, B., Skupin, A.,
Ma, N. and Börner, K. 2011. Clustering more than two
million biomedical publications: Comparing the accuracies
of nine text-based similarity approaches. PLoS ONE. 6, 3,
e18029.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this
work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author. Copyright is
held by the owner/author(s).

SIGIR '14, Jul 6-11, 2014, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.
ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2610376

1275

