A Tag-based Personalized Item Recommendation System
using Tensor Modeling and Topic Model Approaches
Noor Ifada*

School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Science and Engineering Faculty, Queensland University of Technology
Gardens Point Campus, 2 George St, Brisbane, Queensland 4000, Australia

noor.ifada@{qut.edu.au, if.trunojoyo.ac.id}

ABSTRACT

have only been tagged by using several tags. Consequently, the
generated topics might not able to represent the items appropriately. Furthermore, given that each tag can belong to any topics with
various probability scores, the occurrence of tags cannot simply
be mapped by the topics to build the tensor model. A standard
weighting technique will not appropriately calculate the value of
tagging activity since it will define the context of an item using a
tag instead of a topic.

This research falls in the area of enhancing the quality of tagbased item recommendation systems. It aims to achieve this by
employing a multi-dimensional user profile approach and by
analyzing the semantic aspects of tags. Tag-based recommender
systems have two characteristics that need to be carefully studied
in order to build a reliable system. Firstly, the multi-dimensional
correlation, called as tag assignment <user, item, tag>, should be
appropriately modelled in order to create the user profiles [1].
Secondly, the semantics behind the tags should be considered
properly as the flexibility with their design can cause semantic
problems such as synonymy and polysemy [2]. This research
proposes to address these two challenges for building a tag-based
item recommendation system by employing tensor modeling as
the multi-dimensional user profile approach, and the topic model
as the semantic analysis approach.

Categories and Subject Descriptors

H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Information Filtering

Keywords

Tag-based Item Recommendation; Tensor Model: Topic Model

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The first objective is to optimize the tensor model reconstruction
and to improve the model performance in generating quality recommendation. A novel Tensor-based Recommendation using
Probabilistic Ranking (TRPR) method [3] has been developed.
Results show this method to be scalable for large datasets and
outperforming the benchmarking methods in terms of accuracy.
The memory efficient loop implements the -mode block-striped
(matrix) product for tensor reconstruction as an approximation of
the initial tensor. The probabilistic ranking calculates the probability of users to select candidate items using their tag preference list
based on the entries generated from the reconstructed tensor. *

I would like to thank Associate Professor Richi Nayak, my PhD
supervisor, for supervising this research and the Directorate General of Higher Education (DGHE) Indonesia for providing student
scholarship. The computational resources and services used in this
research are provided by the HPC and Research Support Group,
Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia.

REFERENCES

[1] Kim, H.-N., Ji, A.-T., Ha, I., and Jo, G.-S., Collaborative
Filtering based on Collaborative Tagging for Enhancing the
Quality of Recommendation. Electronic Commerce Research
and Applications, 9(1): 73-83, 2010.

The second objective is to analyse the tag semantics and utilize
the outcome in building the tensor model. This research proposes
to investigate the problem using topic model approach to keep the
tags nature as the “social vocabulary” [4]. For the tag assignment
data, topics can be generated from the occurrences of tags given
for an item. However there is only limited amount of tags available to represent items as collection of topics, since an item might
*

[2] Golder, S.A. and Huberman, B.A., Usage patterns of
collaborative tagging systems. Journal of Information
Science, 32(2): 198-208, 2006.
[3] Ifada, N. and Nayak, R. Tensor-based Item Recommendation
using Probabilistic Ranking in Social Tagging Systems. In
Proceedings of The 23rd International Conference on World
Wide Web Companion, pages 805-810, Seoul, Korea, 2014.

Noor Ifada is currently on leave from the Informatics Engineering Department, University of Trunojoyo Madura, Indonesia.

[4] Alper, M.E. Personalized recommendation in folksonomies
using a joint probabilistic model of users, resources and tags.
In Proceedings of The 11th International Conference on
Machine Learning and Applications (ICMLA), pages 368373, Boca Raton, Florida, 2012.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage, and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other
uses, contact the owner/author(s).
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’14, July 6–11, 2014, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.
ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2610381

1280

