Speech Search: Techniques and Tools for Spoken
Content Retrieval
Gareth J. F. Jones
CNGL Centre for Global Intelligent Content
School of Computing, Dublin City University, Dublin 9, Ireland

gjones@computing.dcu.ie
1.

OVERVIEW

Document Retrieval task for broadcast news, and interview retrieval in the CLEF CL-SR task.

Speech search is concerned with the retrieval of spoken
content from archives of speech or multimedia materials.
Importantly speech search does not reduce to application of
text information retrieval to speech recognition transcripts.
Although text information retrieval techniques form a core
technology for speech search, speech search generally involves confronting issues less likely to arise in the text domain, such as high levels of noise in the data and the absence
of clearly defined units of retrieval. This tutorial will provide
researchers in information retrieval with an introduction to
the challenges and technologies of spoken content search.
While speech search has been an active area of research
for around twenty years, during much of this time activities
have focused on retrieval from collections of well defined
and clearly structured content such as radio and television
news. The tutorial will review this establsihed work based
on the detailed descriptions contained in [4]. The current
rapid growth in recordings of more informal audio content,
e.g. in educational and enterprise settings. is creating new
opportunities and demands for speech search technologies.
Despite the developments in existing speech search technologies, these types of data pose challenges for which the solutions proposed to date are either incomplete or require extension or new methodologies. The tutorial will draw on current research to demonstrate the retrieval challenges posed
by this content, and introduce work which aims to develop
effective solutions, e.g. for search of internet video archives
[3], meetings [2] and lectures and presentations [1].

• Oveview of speech technologies for spoken content indexing, including methods for standard large vocabulary transcriptions which have been widely used in
speech retrieval, and methods developed specifically
for speech search including keyword spotting and phone
and word lattices.
• Exploiting additional resources and techniques for spoken content retrieval, including: text metadata, collateral texts, and query and document expansion.
• Searching informal or spontaneous conversational speech
where the content of the documents can be insufficient
to actually support effective search. This will include
advanced indexing and structuring methods such as
use of external metadata and content segmentation to
form effective retrieval units.
• Interactive access to spoken content within specific
items, designed to address the inefficiencies of temporal browsing.
• Evaluation benchmarks for spoken content retrieval,
including a summary of the conclusions of these campaignes and their technical strengths and limitations.
• Thoughts on research directions and open challanges.

3.
2.

TUTORIAL STRUCTURE

REFERENCES

[1] T. Akiba, H. Nizhizaki, K. Aikawa, X. Hu, Y. Itoh,
T. Kawahara, S. Nakagawa, H. Nanjo, and
Y. Yamashita. Overview of the NTCIR-10 SpokenDoc-2
Task. In Proceedings of NTCIR-10 Workshop Meeting,
Tokyo, Japan, 2013.
[2] M.Eskevich and G.J.F.Jones. Exploring speech retrieval
from meetings using the AMI corpus. Computer Speech
and Language (Special Issue on Information Extraction
and Retrieval), 2014.
[3] M.Eskevich, G.J.F. Jones, M.Larson, C.Wartena,
R.Aly, T.Verschoor, and R.Ordelman. Comparing
retrieval effectiveness for alternative content
segmentation methods for internet video. In
Proceedings of the 10th Workshop on Content-Based
Multimedia Indexing (CBMI 2012), 2012.
[4] M.Larson and G.J.F.Jones. Spoken content retrieval: A
survey of techniques and technologies. Foundations and
Trends in Information Retrieval, 5(4-5):235–422, 2011.

The tutorial will be structured as follows:
• Introduction to the scope of the topic of speech search,
its relationship to text information retrieval, and potential application areas.
• History of spoken content retrieval research, including:
early studies using private datasets, the TREC Spoken

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage, and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be
honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). Copyright is held by the
author/owner(s).
SIGIR’14, July 6–11, 2014, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.
ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2602293.

1287

