Novelty and Diversity Enhancement and Evaluation in
Recommender Systems and Information Retrieval
Saúl Vargas
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Spain

saul.vargas@uam.es

recommender systems, seeking connections to diversity research in Information Retrieval.
First, we propose the definition of a new framework of
novelty and diversity metrics for Recommender Systems [4].
This framework adapts and unifies several metrics from the
state of the art under a common probabilistic formulation.
This formulation allows us to consider rank and relevance
when assessing the novelty and diversity of recommendation
lists, which has not been considered previously.
Second, we research the connection of recommendation diversity to the diversity principles and techniques developed
in Information Retrieval for diversity [5]. We explore diversification techniques for recommender systems based on
feature spaces and the extraction of sub-profiles, establishing an analogy with query interpretations or aspects for diversity in Information Retrieval. We study the relationship
between the choice of feature spaces and their effectiveness
in diversification as well.
Furthermore, the thesis delves into the definition of new
methods to both assess and enhance novelty and diversity in
recommender systems. For instance, we analyze the formalization of diversity and the explicit role of relevance under
a probabilistic perspective [6]. We also consider the role
of coverage, redundancy and size-awareness in diversity for
recommender systems. Finally, we also study the popularity
bias observed in many recommendation algorithms and its
effect in terms of novelty and sales diversity, proposing ways
to alleviate it.
We conduct empirical validation and evaluation of metrics
and methods in offline experiments with publicly available
datasets. Furthermore, we envision to incorporate online
and crowdsourced experiments to gain further insights on
the effects of novel and diverse recommendations.

Categories and subject descriptors: H3.3 [Information Search
& Retrieval]: Information Filtering
Keywords: Recommender Systems; Novelty; Diversity

ABSTRACT
The development and evaluation of Information Retrieval
and Recommender Systems has traditionally focused on the
relevance and accuracy of retrieved documents and recommendations, respectively. However, there is an increasing
realization that accuracy alone might be a sub-optimal strategy for a successful user experience [7, 3]. Properties such
as novelty and diversity have been explored in both fields
for assessing and enhancing the usefulness of search results
and recommendations. In this doctoral research we study
the assessment and enhancement of both properties in the
confluence of Information Retrieval and Recommender Systems.
In Information Retrieval, diversity is posited a quality of
result lists that helps cope with the ambiguity and underspecification in users queries, whereas novelty is understood
as the quality of a system that avoids redundancy. In the
last years there have been proposals and significant advances
for both assessing [2] and enhancing [3] novelty and diversity in search results. Recommender Systems can be seen
as a particular case of personalized Information Retrieval
where there is no explicit query, but just implicit information about the user’s interests. Researchers have realized
that improving recommendations’ usefulness and user satisfaction may require more than being accurate. Recommending novel items helps avoiding recommending too obvious or
popular items [1]. Moreover, the effectiveness of recommendations can be enhanced by acknowledging the user’s diverse
tastes [7].
The novelty and diversity problem has nonetheless been
approached under different views and formulations in both
fields, giving rise to different models, methodologies, and
metrics, with little convergence between both fields in this
particular area. Our research addresses the problem of modeling and enhancing novelty and diversity in the context of

1. REFERENCES
[1] O. Celma and P. Herrera. A new approach to evaluating novel
recommendations. RecSys, 2008, pp. 1279–186
[2] C. L. Clarke, M. Kolla, G. V. Cormack, O. Vechtomova,
A. Ashkan, S. Büttcher, and I. MacKinnon. Novelty and diversity
in information retrieval evaluation. SIGIR, 2008, pp. 659–666.
[3] R. L. Santos, C. Macdonald, and I. Ounis. Exploiting query
reformulations for web search result diversification. WWW,
2010, pp. 881–890.
[4] S. Vargas and P. Castells. Rank and relevance in novelty and
diversity metrics for recommender systems. RecSys, 2011, pp.
109–116.
[5] S. Vargas, P. Castells, and D. Vallet. Intent-oriented diversity in
recommender systems. RecSys, 2011, pp. 1211–1212.
[6] S. Vargas, P. Castells, and D. Vallet. Explicit relevance models
in intent-oriented information retrieval diversification. SIGIR,
2012, pp. 75–84.
[7] C.-N. Ziegler, S. M. McNee, J. A. Konstan, and G. Lausen.
Improving recommendation lists through topic diversification.
WWW, 2005, pp. 22–32.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage, and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be
honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). Copyright is held by the
author/owner(s).
SIGIR’14, July 6–11, 2014, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.
ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2610382 .

1281

