Scalability and Efficiency Challenges in
Large-Scale Web Search Engines
B. Barla Cambazoglu

Ricardo Baeza-Yates

Yahoo Labs
Barcelona, Spain

Yahoo Labs
Barcelona, Spain

barla@yahoo-inc.com

rbaeza@acm.org

ABSTRACT

mainly focusing on the web crawling, indexing, and query
processing components. The scalability and efficiency issues
encountered in the above-mentioned components are presented at four different granularities: at the level of a single
computer, a cluster of computers, a single data center, and
a multi-center search engine. The tutorial also points at the
open research problems and provides recommendations to
researchers who are new to the field.

Large-scale web search engines rely on massive compute infrastructures to be able to cope with the continuous growth
of the Web and their user bases. In such search engines,
achieving scalability and efficiency requires making careful
architectural design choices while devising algorithmic performance optimizations. Unfortunately, most details about
the internal functioning of commercial web search engines
remain undisclosed due to their financial value and the high
level of competition in the search market. The main objective of this tutorial is to provide an overview of the fundamental scalability and efficiency challenges in commercial
web search engines, bridging the existing gap between the
industry and academia.

2.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information
Search and Retrieval

3.

OBJECTIVES

The following are the main objectives of the tutorial.
• To provide an in-depth background on the architectural components of a web search engine.
• To present the fundamental scalability and efficiency
issues which have been often addressed in the information retrieval literature.
• To shed some light into the techniques used in largescale commercial search engines and bridge the gap
between the industry and academia.
• To identify open research problems in the context of
web search engine scalability and efficiency, promoting
further research on the topic.

Keywords
Web search engines; crawling; indexing; query processing;
efficiency; scalability

1.

PREVIOUS EDITIONS

The content and structure of the tutorial are based on a
book chapter published by the presenters [2]. A small subset
of this tutorial is presented in the 2nd COST 804 Training
School on Energy Efficiency in Large Scale Distributed Systems in 2012. More recently, the tutorial was presented in
SIGIR’13 [3] and WWW’14 [1].

DESCRIPTION

Commercial web search engines need to process thousands of queries every second and provide responses to user
queries within a few hundred milliseconds. As a consequence
of these tight performance constraints, search engines construct and maintain very large compute infrastructures for
crawling the Web, indexing discovered pages, and processing
user queries. Achieving scalability and efficiency requires
making careful performance optimizations in every major
component of the search engine.
This tutorial aims to provide a fairly comprehensive
overview of the scalability and efficiency challenges in largescale web search engines. In particular, the tutorial provides
an in-depth architectural overview of a web search engine,

4.

REFERENCES

[1] R. Baeza-Yates and B. B. Cambazoglu. Scalability and
efficiency challenges in large-scale web search engines.
In Proceedings of the Companion Publication of the
23rd International Conference on World Wide Web
Companion, pages 185–186, 2014.
[2] B. B. Cambazoglu and R. Baeza-Yates. Scalability
challenges in web search engines. In M. Melucci,
R. Baeza-Yates, and W. B. Croft, editors, Advanced
Topics in Information Retrieval, volume 33 of The
Information Retrieval Series, pages 27–50. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2011.
[3] B. B. Cambazoglu and R. Baeza-Yates. Scalability and
efficiency challenges in commercial web search engines.
In Proceedings of the 36th International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval, page 1124, 2013.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage, and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be
honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). Copyright is held by the
author/owner(s).
SIGIR’14, July 6–11, 2014, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.
ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2602291.

1285

