Choices and Constraints: Research Goals and
Approaches in Information Retrieval (Part 1)
Diane Kelly

Filip Radlinski

Jaime Teevan

University of North Carolina
Chapel Hill, NC, USA

Microsoft
Cambridge, UK

Microsoft
Redmond, WA, USA

dianek@email.unc.edu

filiprad@microsoft.com

teevan@microsoft.com

ABSTRACT

Aim 2: To improve participants’ understandings of research
choices and constraints. Every research project requires
researchers to make a series of choices about a range of factors
(e.g., participants, sample size, tasks, and corpus) and usually
there are constraints that influence these choices. It can be
difficult to understand the choices researchers make with regard
to research design by reading published literature, as few authors
explicitly state how pragmatic, professional, and personal
constraints influenced their research design choices. By using
some of our own research papers, we aim to expose participants
to the experiential aspects of the research process by giving
them a behind the scenes view of how we make/made choices in
our own research. Along with discussing “how we did it” we
also want to discuss “why we did it this way.”

All research projects begin with a goal, for instance to describe
search behavior, to predict when a person will enter a second
query, or to discover which IR system performs the best.
Different research goals suggest different research approaches,
ranging from field studies to lab studies to online
experimentation. This tutorial will provide an overview of the
different types of research goals, common evaluation approaches
used to address each type, and the constraints each approach
entails. Participants will come away with a broad perspective of
research goals and approaches in IR, and an understanding of
the benefits and limitations of these research approaches.
The tutorial will take place in two independent, but interrelated
parts, each focusing on a unique set of research approaches but
with the same intended tutorial outcomes. These outcomes will
be accomplished by deconstructing and analyzing our own
published research papers, with further illustrations of each
technique using the broader literature. By using our own
research as anchors, we will provide insight about the research
process, revealing the difficult choices and trade-offs researchers
make when designing and conducting IR studies.

Aim 3: To inspire outside-the-search-box research. We
believe that contemporary IR research has come to be overly
dominated by topics that can be addressed using standard test
collections or dumps of tremendously large-scale search engine
log data, and by search innovations that are limited to ‘onedegree-of-Google’ mentality. We aim to inspire new research
that does not involve small improvements to systems modeled
on the standard web search model.

Categories and Subject Descriptors

Aim 4: To provide guidance and references to enact best
practices and greater openness of alternative approaches.
We have observed that without formal guidance people often
develop ill-informed ideas about issues such as appropriate
sample size and selection and sampling of tasks that reflect real
user behavior. Thus, the last goal of this tutorial is to provide
participants with guidance about best practices and increase their
knowledge of research design. In doing so, we hope this will
foster greater awareness of, and openness to, alternative research
approaches, so that when evaluating research reports participants
can consider the relationship among the research goals,
approaches and the researcher’s choices, as opposed to whether
the research methods were chosen simply to mimic the status
quo without regard to their appropriateness to the study goals.

H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information
Search and Retrieval

General Terms
Design, Experimentation

Keywords
Research methods, field experiments, laboratory experiments,
field observation, large-scale log analysis.

1. Motivation and Objectives
Aim 1: To help participants develop a broader perspective of
research goals and approaches in IR. There are three major
goals of research: description, prediction and explanation. These
goals naturally build on one another, and in many cases are
associated with certain research approaches. In this tutorial, we
would like to examine and analyze these different goals and
approaches, draw attention to underrepresented goals and
approaches, and encourage participants to consider pursing a
variety of goals and approaches.

2. Overview of Part 1
Part 1 will focus on experimental approaches to information
retrieval research, specifically controlled laboratory studies
(smaller scale user studies) and field experiments (such as A/B
testing). The studies covered in this part seek to describe, predict
and explain, and are essential for explanatory research that
evaluates causal models. In both laboratory and field
experiments, the groups studied can be characterized as
‘treatment groups,’ because they are constructed as the
researcher brings participants together so that their behavior can
be studied under conditions that the researcher manipulates or
creates.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or
distributed for profit or commercial advantage, and that copies bear this notice
and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of
this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’14, July 6–11, 2014, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.
ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2602289

1283

