Enrichment of User Profiles across Multiple Online Social
Networks for Volunteerism Matching for Social Enterprise
Xuemeng Song
School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore

a0095661@nus.edu.sg

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: H.3.3 Information Search and Retrieval

Keywords
Volunteerism matching; Multiple sources; User proﬁling

ABSTRACT
In modern society, volunteers act socially and economically
as a work force of signiﬁcant importance, without whom
each society would face up with a major crisis. On the other
hand, many talents are looking for appropriate volunteer opportunities to realize their dreams of making a contribution
to the society with their expertise. This is a typical supply
and demand matching issue. Fortunately, user proﬁling and
the discovery of user volunteer tendency can beneﬁt from
users’ continuous enthusiasm and active participation in diverse online social networks (OSNs) and the huge amount
of publicly available user generated contents (UGCs).
Due to the diﬀerent services oﬀered by diﬀerent OSNs,
people tent to simultaneously participating in multiple OSNs
for diﬀerent purposes. Therefore, information about a user
from a single source can be relatively limited. In particular,
aggregating and exploring users’ footprints casually left on
all of these OSNs is a promising approach to generate more
comprehensive summaries of users’ proﬁles [1].
The scheme of volunteerism matching consists of two main
components: Volunteer Tendency Prediction and Volunteerism
Matching. Currently, we are still working on the ﬁrst part.
We tested our scheme on the three most popular social
networks: LinkedIn, Twitter, and Facebook. The social
account mapping was constructed by taking advantage of
users’ explicit external social links on their About.me1 and
Quora2 proﬁles to their distributed proﬁles on multiple OSNs.
In this work, we only considered users who are LinkedIn
1
2

https://about.me/
http://www.quora.com/

members. In particular, we harvested the form-based profile, content-based profile, and social connection-based profile
for each seed user from the corresponding services. We then
treat the problem of volunteer tendency prediction as a binary classiﬁcation task. The ground-truth for evaluation
were derived from the presence of Linkedin volunteer experience. In total, the gold dataset consists of 1,368 active
volunteers and 4,005 ordinary people.
Based on the conceptual volunteering decision model proposed by Peneer et al. [2], we developed a set of features
falling into four main categories: Demographic Characteristics (age, gender), Personal Attributes (user posting pattern, egocentric social networks), Linguistic Content (Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count features, topic distribution),
and Social Pressure & Activators (social connections’ volunteer tendency). Several state-of-the-art machine learning classiﬁcation models were investigated over these features to tackle this problem, including Support Vector Machine(SVM), Gradient Boosted Decision Trees (GBDT) and
Random Forest. The preliminary experimental results showed
that integrating multiple OSN sources outperforms the use
of only a single OSN source. Particularly, in terms of F1Measure, performance can be improved by more than 20%
through multiple OSN sources.
In summary, the ﬁndings of current work are expected
to facilitate the detection of potential volunteer candidates
with skills for social enterprise. Meanwhile, the ﬁnding of
this work may give rise to concerns about privacy issue as expected. Although all the experiments were conducted solely
based on users’ publicly available data, people may still feel
vulnerable being the subject of identities in our research. In
the next phase of research, we will simultaneously work on
privacy preserving technologies to allay users’ fear of being
identiﬁed and targeted; and on tackling the second component of our scheme: Volunteerism Matching. We will recommend a list of volunteer candidates for concrete demands
based on users’ volunteer tendency and interests. However,
the establishment of ground truth for next step of research
would be more challenging.

1.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage, and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be
honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). Copyright is held by the
author/owner(s).
SIGIR’14, July 6–11, 2014, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.
ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2610383.

REFERENCES

[1] M. Pennacchiotti and A.-M. Popescu. Democrats,
republicans and starbucks aﬃcionados: user
classiﬁcation in twitter. In SIGKDD, 2011.
[2] L. A. Penner. Volunteerism and social problems:
Making things better or worse? Journal of Social
Issues, 2004.

1282

