Axiomatic Analysis and Optimization of Information
Retrieval Models
Hui Fang

ChengXiang Zhai

Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering
University of Delaware
Newark, DE USA

Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL USA

czhai@illinois.edu

hfang@udel.edu

ABSTRACT

mathematical constraints on retrieval functions which capture desirable properties of a reasonable retrieval function.
These constraints enable analytical comparison of retrieval
functions to assess their effectiveness and provide guidance
on developing more effective retrieval functions. Moreover,
the axiomatic analysis and optimization of IR models enabled deeper understanding of deficiencies of existing IR
models through constraint analysis and diagnostic evaluation, and has led to the improvement of multiple state of
the art IR models. While the existing work have mostly
explored this approach for optimizing retrieval models, the
basic idea of axiomatic analysis is quite general and can
be potentially useful for optimizing models and methods in
many other problem domains.
This tutorial provides a systematical review and explanation of this promising axiomatic approach to developing optimal IR models. We introduce the basic idea and methodology of applying axiomatic thinking to develop effective retrieval models, summarize the research work done in this
area, and discuss promising future research challenges and
opportunities. More information about this topic is available
at http://www.eecis.udel.edu/~hfang/AX.html.

Axiomatic approach provides a systematic way to think about
heuristics, identify the weakness of existing methods, and
optimize the existing methods accordingly. This tutorial
aims to promote axiomatic thinking that can benefit not only
the study of IR models but also the methods for many IR
applications.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Retrieval models
General Terms: Algorithms
Keywords: axiomatic analysis; information retrieval models; retrieval constraints; optimization

1.

OVERVIEW

One of the most important research problems in Information Retrieval (IR) is to develop optimal general IR models.
Since IR models determine how to compute the relevance
score of a document for a given query, they directly affect the
accuracy of a search engine. An improved retrieval model
is expected to enable every search engine to achieve higher
search accuracy. Thus, it has been a long-standing challenge
to develop a general effective retrieval model.
Over the past decades, significant amount of research has
focused on developing and studying various retrieval models. These efforts have led to a few state of the art retrieval
functions including Pivoted normalization function from the
vector space model, Okapi BM25 from the classical probabilistic model, Dirichlet prior smoothing from the language
modeling approach and PL2 from the divergence from randomness model. However, it has been shown to be difficult
to further improve these state of the art retrieval functions.
Recently, there has been a promising breakthrough in IR
model research where a novel axiomatic framework is used
to model the relevance, diagnose deficiencies of existing IR
models and improve them. In particular, the basic idea is
to model the relevance more directly with formally defined

2.

TUTORIAL OUTLINE
1. Introduction
(a) Review of existing IR models
(b) Overview of axiomatic approaches to IR
2. Formalization of IR constraints
(a) Basic retrieval constraints
(b) Advanced retrieval constraints
(c) Discussions: strong vs. weak constraints
3. Analysis of IR models with constraints
(a) Analysis of basic IR functions
(b) Benefits of constraint analysis
(c) Diagnostic evaluation
4. Development of novel IR functions
(a) General strategy
(b) Inductive definition of a function space
(c) Constraint-driven modification of existing IR functions
5. Beyond basic retrieval models
(a) Axiomatic analysis of pseudo feedback models
(b) Axiomatic analysis of translation language models
6. Conclusions
(a) Summary of the current research progress
(b) Challenges and future directions
(c) Towards axiomatic thinking

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage, and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s). Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’14, July 6–11, 2014, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.
ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2611178.

1288

