Privacy-Preserving IR: When Information Retrieval Meets
Privacy and Security
Luo Si

Hui Yang

Purdue University, USA

Georgetown University, USA

lsi@purdue.edu

huiyang@cs.georgetown.edu

ABSTRACT

vacy and data security. In fact, due to lack of mature techniques in privacy-preserving information retrieval, concerns
about information privacy and security have become serious
obstacles that prevent valuable user data to be used in IR
research. For instance, the recent TREC Medical Record
Retrieval Tracks are halted because of the privacy issue and
the TREC Microblog Tracks could not provide participants
with a standard testbed of tweets for system development.
The situation needs to be improved in a timely manner.
Some research themes of the workshop include:

Information retrieval (IR) and information privacy/security
are two fast-growing computer science disciplines. There
are many synergies and connections between these two disciplines. However, there have been very limited efforts to connect the two important disciplines. On the other hand, due
to lack of mature techniques in privacy-preserving IR, concerns about information privacy and security have become
serious obstacles that prevent valuable user data to be used
in IR research such as studies on query logs, social media,
tweets, sessions, and medical record retrieval. This privacypreserving IR workshop aims to spur research that brings
together the research fields of IR and privacy/security, and
research that mitigates privacy threats in information retrieval by constructing novel algorithms and tools that enable web users to better understand associated privacy risks.

• Protecting User Privacy in Search, Recommendation
and Beyond [2]: much damage can be caused as users
can be identified in AOL query log data and Neflix
log data. It is important to develop effective and efficient solutions to protect users’ privacy in information
retrieval applications;
• Information Exposure Detection [4]: new information
retrieval and natural language processing technologies
are needed to quickly identify components of a user’s
online public profile that may reduce the user’s privacy,
and warn one’s vulnerability on the Web;
• Novel Information Retrieval Techniques for Information Privacy/Security Application: new information
retrieval or machine learning techniques need to be designed to fit the practice of applications in information
privacy and security;
• IR Techniques for Enabling Location Privacy in LocationBased Services [3]: data about a user’s location and
historical movements can potentially be gathered by
a third party who takes away the information without the awareness of the service providers and the
users. How recommender systems can interact privacyenhancing technologies such as Location Obfuscation;
• Private Information Retrieval (PIR) and Data Sharing
[1]: new cryptographic protocols are needed to safeguard the privacy of IR users; they allow clients to
retrieve information from shared datasets while completely hiding the identity of the retrieved data.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3 [Information Systems ]: Information Storage and Retrieval

Keywords
Privacy-Preserving Information Retrieval

1.

MOTIVATION & THEMES

Information retrieval provides a set of information seeking,
organization, analysis, and decision-making techniques. Information privacy/security defends information from unauthorized or malicious use, disclosure, modification, attack,
and destruction. There are many synergies and connections
between these two disciplines. For example, information retrieval researchers or practitioners often need to consider privacy or security issues in designing solutions of information
processing and management, while researchers in information privacy and security often utilize information retrieval
techniques when they build the adversary models. However,
there have been limited efforts to connect the two disciplines.
A few instances of IR practices have raised concerns about
privacy and security. One famous example is the AOL query
log release that raised a great deal of controversial discussions about how IR researchers can use available online materials to advance their research while preserving users’ pri-

2.

REFERENCES

[1] B. Chor, E. Kushilevitz, O. Goldreich, and M. Sudan.
Private information retrieval. Journal of ACM,
45(6):965–981, Nov. 1998.
[2] W. Jiang, L. Si, and J. Li. Protecting source privacy in
federated search. In SIGIR, pages 761–762, 2007.
[3] A. Khoshgozaran and C. Shahabi. Privacy in
location-based applications. Springer-Verlag, 2009.
[4] W. B. Moore, Y. Wei, A. Orshefsky, M. Sherr,
L. Singh, and H. Yang. Understanding site-based
inference potential for identifying hidden attributes.
PASSAT, pages 570–577, 2013.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage, and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be
honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). Copyright is held by the
author/owner(s).
SIGIR’14, July 6–11, 2014, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.
ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2600737.

1295

