MedIR14: Medical Information Retrieval Workshop
Lorraine Goeuriot

Gareth J.F. Jones

Liadh Kelly

CNGL, School of Computing
Dublin City University
Ireland

CNGL, School of Computing
Dublin City University
Ireland

CNGL, School of Computing
Dublin City University
Ireland

lgoeuriot@computing.dcu.iegjones@computing.dcu.ie lkelly@computing.dcu.ie
Henning Müller
Justin Zobel
Information Systems Institute
HES-SO
Switzerland

henning.mueller@hevs.ch
ABSTRACT

Department of Computing &
Information Systems
University of Melbourne
Australia

jzobel@unimelb.edu.au
tion; the multi-modal nature of data (for example, health
records with clinical notes and images); the need for retrieval
of accurate and reliable information; and the means to evaluate medical search tools.
The objective of the workshop is to provide a forum to
enable the progression of research in medical information
retrieval in order to create enhanced search services for all
users with interests in medical information search. The
workshop brings together researchers interested in medical
information search with the aim of identifying specific research challenges that need to be addressed to advance the
state-of-the-art, and of fostering collaborations towards the
meeting of these challenges. To enable this, we encourage
participation from researchers in all fields related to medical information search including mainstream information
retrieval, but also natural language processing, multilingual
text processing, and medical image analysis.
The workshop topics include, but are not limited to:

Medical information is accessible from diverse sources including the general web, social media, journal articles, and
hospital records; information searchers can be patients and
their families, researchers, practitioners and clinicians. Challenges in medical information retrieval include: diversity of
users and user knowledge and expertise; variations in the
format, reliability, and quality of biomedical and medical information; the multi-modal nature of much of the data; and
the need for accuracy and reliability of medical information.
The aim of the workshop is to bring together researchers
interested in medical information search with the goal of
identifying specific challenges that need to be addressed to
advance the state-of-the-art.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information
Search and Retrieval

• Users and information needs
• Semantics and NLP for medical IR

Keywords

• Reliability and trust in medical IR

Medical information retrieval

• Personalised search

1.

OVERVIEW

• Evaluation of medical IR

Medical information is now accessible from many sources
including the general web, social media, journal articles, and
hospital records, and is of interest to a wide variety of users
such as patients and their families, researchers, practitioners, and clinicians. Medical information retrieval (IR) poses
many challenges, including: diversity of users (varying categories of information needs, varying levels of medical knowledge, and varying language skills); variations in the format,
reliability, and quality of biomedical and medical informa-

• Multilingual issues in medical IR
• Multimedia technologies in medical IR
• The role of social media in medical IR
The workshop programme includes an invited presentation
by Karin Verspoor, and short research and position papers
describing approaches or challenges on the topics of the
workshop. The programme aims to encourage interaction
and discussion to develop a shared understanding of the research challenges facing the area of medical information retrieval. The workshop will seek to identify specific actions
necessary to advance this field, and to hopefully foster further collaborations between the participants.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage, and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be
honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). Copyright is held by the
author/owner(s).
SIGIR’14, July 6–11, 2014, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.
ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2600736.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the Khresmoi project (257528) for
partially supporting the workshop.

1294

