SoMeRA 2014:
Social Media Retrieval and Analysis Workshop
Markus Schedl

Johannes Kepler University
Linz, Austria

markus.schedl@jku.at

Peter Knees

Johannes Kepler University
Linz, Austria

peter.knees@jku.at

ABSTRACT

jlshen@smu.edu.sg

of social media analysis and -mining [1, 3]. Corresponding
user models which are built from this knowledge will improve retrieval and recommendation in social media, going
far beyond text-based search which is still the most common paradigm [4]. The gained knowledge also enables intelligently informed and enriched applications in various media
domains [5, 2].

The SoMeRA workshop targets cutting edge research from
all fields of retrieval, recommendation, and browsing in social media, as well as the analysis of user’s multifaceted
traces therein. Submissions to the workshop cover a broad
range of topics including multimedia retrieval and exploration, user-aware recommender systems, network analysis,
event detection, and computational linguistics.

2. PURPOSE AND TOPICS

Categories and Subject Descriptors

The purpose of the workshop is to bring together researchers of different domains who are involved in social media
analysis, mining, and retrieval, for instance, experts in multimedia, recommender systems, and user modeling. This
is reflected by the 19 submissions received that cover topics as diverse as multimedia retrieval and exploration, useraware recommender systems, network analysis, event detection, and computational linguistics in social media. Out of
these, we selected the most outstanding works to be presented at the workshop, which featured oral presentations
of long papers and poster presentations of work in progress,
indexed in the ACM Digital Library.

Information systems [Information retrieval]; Human-centered computing [Collaborative and social computing]:
Social media

Keywords
Social Media Analysis; Social Media Retrieval

1.

Jialie Shen

Singapore Management
University

MOTIVATION

The amount of user-generated data (including content and
contextual information of the users) has been spiraling during the past few years. Social media are fundamentally
changing the way how we communicate. Nowadays, people
create, share, and consume a huge number of multimedia
material on the web and in particular on social platforms.
The faster the growth of these corpora, the harder it gets
for the individual to find the media documents which satisfy
a particular information need. When it comes to multimedia material in particular, the users might also exhibit an
entertainment need, which may involve aspects of novelty,
serendipity, familiarity, or popularity. However, current retrieval, recommendation, and browsing techniques often fall
short to deal with user-generated data of various kinds (audio, image, video, text, contextual, etc.), especially on a
larger scale.
Satisfying the information- or entertainment need of users
in social media data requires a comprehensive understanding of them, which can be gained to some extent by means

3. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The workshop is supported by the European Union Seventh Framework Programme FP7/2007-2013 through grant
agreements no. 601166 (PHENICX) and no. 610591 (GiantSteps), as well as by the Austrian Science Funds (FWF):
P22856 and P25655.

4. REFERENCES
[1] G. Adomavicius, B. Mobasher, F. Ricci, and
A. Tuzhilin. Context-aware recommender systems. AI
Magazine, 32:67–80, 2011.
[2] P. Knees and M. Schedl. A Survey of Music Similarity
and Recommendation from Music Context Data. ACM
Transactions on Multimedia Computing,
Communications, and Applications (TOMCCAP),
10(1), 2013.
[3] M.-F. Moens, J. Li, and T.-S. Chua. Mining of User
Generated Content and Its Applications. CRC
Press/Chapman Hall, 2013.
[4] F. Ricci, L. Rokach, B. Shapira, and P. B. Kantor,
editors. Recommender Systems Handbook. Springer,
2011.
[5] Z.-J. Zha, M. Wang, J. Shen, and T.-S. Chua. Text
Mining in Multimedia, pages 361–384. Springer, 2012.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for prof t or commercial advantage, and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the f rst page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be
honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). Copyright is held by the
author/owner(s).
SIGIR’14, July 6–11, 2014, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.
ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2600739.

1297

