SIGIR 2014 Workshop on Temporal, Social and
Spatially-aware Information Access (#TAIA2014)
Fernando Diaz
Claudia Hauff
Vanessa Murdock
fdiaz@microsoft.com
c.hauff@tudelft.nl
vanmur@microsoft.com
Maarten de Rijke
Milad Shokouhi
milads@microsoft.com
derijke@uva.nl
1.

OVERVIEW

current research focuses on user modeling and personalization, temporal dynamics of information, context and search,
and gaze-enhanced interaction techniques. She has worked
closely with several Microsoft groups on search-related innovations, including Bing, Windows Desktop Search, SharePoint, and Office Online Help. Susan has published widely
in the fields of information science, human-computer interaction and cognitive science, and holds several patents on
novel retrieval algorithms and interfaces. Susan is an adjunct professor in the Information School at the University
of Washington. She is Past-Chair of ACM’s Special Interest
Group in Information Retrieval (SIGIR). She was elected to
the CHI Academy in 2005, an ACM Fellow in 2006, received
the SIGIR Gerard Salton Award for Lifetime Achievement
in 2009, was elected to the National Academy of Engineering (NAE) in 2011, and received the Athena Lecture Award
in 2014.
James Caverlee2 is an Associate Professor in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering at Texas
A&M University. His research focuses on web-scale information management, distributed data-intensive systems, and
social computing. Recently, he works on spam and crowdturfing threats to social media and web systems, and geosocial systems that leverage large-scale spatio-temporal footprints in social media. Caverlee received the 2010 Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency Young Faculty Award,
the 2012 Air Force Office of Scientific Research (AFOSR)
Young Investigator Award, and 2012 NSF CAREER Award.
He received his Ph.D. from Georgia Tech in 2007, M.S.
degrees in Computer Science (2001) and in EngineeringEconomic Systems & Operations Research (2000) from Stanford University, and a B.A. in Economics from Duke University (1996, magna cum laude).
Klaus Berberich3 is a Senior Researcher at the Max
Planck Institute for Informatics where he coordinates the
research area Text + Time Search & Analytics. His research
is rooted in Information Retrieval and related areas of Data
Management and Data Mining. Klaus has built a time machine to search web archives. He has worked on frequent
sequence mining algorithms for modern platforms such as
MapReduce. His ongoing research focuses on (i) novelty
and diversity in web archive search; (ii) temporal linking of
document collections; (iii) mining document collections for
insights about the past, present, and future. Klaus holds
a doctoral degree (2010, summa cum laude) and a diploma
(2004) in Computer Science from Saarland University.

Spatial and temporal context are increasingly important
as users rely more on mobile devices to access information
on the Web. Although information access applications are
becoming more context-savvy, users’ expectations are far
ahead of current capabilities. For example, users expect a
given application to understand the nature of their current
immediate surroundings, while many systems have trouble
drawing an accurate map of a city, or assigning a geographic
and temporal scope to a web document. Successfully incorporating spatial and temporal context into the retrieval and
user models opens up a universe of hyperlocal scenarios.
Users provide an unprecedented volume of detailed, and
continuously updated information about where they are,
what they are doing, who they are with, and what they are
thinking and feeling about their current activities. The provision of this stream creates an informal contract between
the user and the information access application that the user
will provide the information, but the application must provide results that are contextually relevant. Many of the research questions about how to understand and employ user
context have yet to be answered.
We bring together practitioners and researchers, in a program centered around short papers, keynote speakers, and
discussion of recent breakthroughs and challenges in spatial
and temporal information access, from algorithmic and architectural perspectives.

2.

KEYNOTE SPEAKERS

Susan Dumais1 is a Distinguished Scientist at Microsoft
and Deputy Managing Director of the Microsoft Research
Lab in Redmond. She also manages the Context, Learning
and User Experience for Search (CLUES) Group. Prior to
joining Microsoft Research, she was at Bell Labs and Bellcore for many years, where she worked on Latent Semantic Analysis, techniques for integrating search and navigation, and organizational impacts of new technology. Her
1

http://resesearch.microsoft.com/~sdumais

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage, and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be
honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). Copyright is held by the
author/owner(s).
SIGIR’14, July 6–11, 2014, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.
ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2600740.

2
3

1298

http://faculty.cse.tamu.edu/caverlee/
http://www.mpi-inf.mpg.de/~kberberi/

