ERD’14: Entity Recognition and Disambiguation Challenge
SIGIR 2014 Workshop
David Carmel

Ming-Wei Chang

Yahoo Labs
MATAM
Haifa, 31905 Israel

Microsoft Research
One Microsoft Way
Redmond, WA 98052

david.carmel@ymail.com minchang@microsoft.com
Evgeniy Gabrilovich
Bo-June (Paul) Hsu
Kuansan Wang
Google
1600 Amphitheatre Parkway
Mountain View, CA 94043

gabr@google.com

Microsoft Research
One Microsoft Way
Redmond, WA 98052

paulhsu@microsoft.com

Categories and Subject Descriptors

Kuansan.Wang@microsoft.com

• the context in which a surface form appears often constrains valid entity interpretations, and

H.3 [Information Systems]: Information Storage and Retrieval

• an ambiguous surface form may match multiple entity
interpretations, especially in short text.

General Terms

The challenge has two parallel tracks. In the “long text”
track, the challenge focuses on pages crawled from the Web;
these contain documents that are meant to be easily understandable by humans. The “short text” track, on the other
hand, consists of web search queries that are intended for a
machine. As a result, the text is typically short and often
lacks proper punctuation and capitalization. We hope the
outcome of this challenge will provide researchers interested
in the field with an opportunity to compare different approaches, exchange thoughts, and formulate a shared vision
to advance entity research in the future.
The challenge is open to the general public and participants are asked to build their systems as publicly accessible web services using whatever resources at their disposal.
The entries to the challenge are submitted in the form of
URLs to the participants’ web services. Participants have
a period of 3 months to test their systems using development datasets hosted by the challenge website. The final
evaluations and the determination of winners are performed
on held-out datasets that have similar properties to the development sets. Further details can be found at the ERD
challenge website at
http://web-ngram.research.microsoft.com/erd2014, and
detailed rules of the challenge can be found at
http://web-ngram.research.microsoft.com/erd2014/
Docs/Detail%20Rules.pdf. Archived discussions of a dedicated
mailing
list
can
be
found
at
https://groups.google.com/d/forum/erd-2014.
The ERD challenge is organized as a SIGIR workshop,
and every team that submits results to one of the tracks
is invited to the workshop to presents its approach. The
workshop is co-sponsored by Google and Microsoft.

Algorithms, Experimentation, Measurement

Keywords
Entity linking, entity disambiguation

1.

Microsoft Research
One Microsoft Way
Redmond, WA 98052

OVERVIEW

With the emerging focus of search engines on semantic
search, there is a growing need to understand queries and
documents not only syntactically, but semantically as well.
Over the recent years, major search engines have redesigned
their output to accommodate some semantic information
about the entities recognized in queries and search results.
Recent information retrieval studies published in SIGIR have
also paid a significant amount of attention to entity-related
research. However, techniques for accurate entity recognition and disambiguation are still far from perfect. The motivation of this workshop is to advance the state of the art
in entity recognition and disambiguation for both long and
short web documents.
The objective of an Entity Recognition and Disambiguation (ERD) system is to recognize mentions of entities in a
given text, disambiguate them, and map them to the known
entities in a given collection or knowledge base. Building a
good ERD system is challenging because
• entities may appear in different surface forms,

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage, and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be
honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). Copyright is held by the
author/owner(s).
SIGIR’14, July 6–11, 2014, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.
ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2600734.

1292

