SIGIR 2014 Workshop on
Semantic Matching in Information Retrieval
Julio Gonzalo∗ , Hang Li† , Alessandro Moschitti‡ , Jun Xu†
∗

†

UNED, Madrid, Spain
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies, Hong Kong
‡
Qatar Computing Research Institute, Qatar

Categories and Subject Descriptors

The need for SM is particularly strong when we consider
information retrieval tasks beyond query-document matching: for instance, successfully answering a complex informational query demands not only retrieving a set of appropriate
documents, but also aggregating and synthesizing the information in the documents, which is relevant for the query.
For instance, Online Reputation Management [1] usually
implies finding, understanding and aggregating thousands
of facts, comments and opinions about an entity in order
to understand threats to its reputation at a given point in
time. This cannot be done without SM techniques.
SM can be extended to phrases or sentences. Indeed, there
are initiatives such as the semantic textual similarity (STS)
evaluation campaign [2], which go beyond term level matching and aim at capturing the semantic relations between
entire phrases as well as those between entire sentences.
Approaches to semantic match have been recently developed for web search [4] and question answering [3], e.g.,
query reformulation, term dependency model, translation
model, topic modeling, kernel methods, latent space model,
deep learning. Additionally, semantic resources such as Wikipedia, DBpedia, and so on have been explored to enable
matching between common-knowledge concepts and/or entities, e.g., Barrack Obama and President, as well as Apple
and Cupertino Company.
Given the complexity of the task, there are many challenging or unknown issues, especially when natural language
processing (NLP) methods are applied to IR applications.
Future research topics may include developments of new and
advanced algorithms, novel metrics and procedures for evaluation, sophisticated methods of data creation and collection, innovative methods of combination with traditional IR
and NLP technologies, real-time large scale NLP, and novel
and useful applications.

H.4.0 [Information Systems Applications]: General

Keywords
semantic matching, information retrieval

1. OVERVIEW
Recently, significant progress has been made in research
on what we call semantic matching (SM), in web search,
question answering, online advertisement, cross-language information retrieval, and other tasks. Advanced technologies
based on machine learning have been developed.
Let us take Web search as example of the problem that
also pervades the other tasks. When comparing the textual
content of query and documents, Web search still heavily relies on the term-based approach, where the relevance scores
between queries and documents are calculated on the basis of
the degree of matching between query terms and document
terms. This simple approach works rather well in practice,
partly because there are many other signals in web search
(hypertext, user logs, etc.) that complement it. However,
when considering the long tail of web searches, it can suffer from data sparseness, e.g., Trenton does not match New
Jersey Capital. Query document mismatches occur when
searcher and author use diﬀerent terms (representations),
and this phenomenon is prevalent due to the nature of human language.
The fundamental reason for mismatch is that little language analysis is conducted in search. A more realistic approach beyond bag-of-words, referred to as SM. The latter conducts deeper query and document analysis to encode
text with richer representations and then perform querydocument matching with such representations by extracting
and utilizing the semantic information, e.g., Trenton is the
New Jersey Capital. For example, Google uses geographical/administrative databases to derive such information.
SM is expected to solve the query document mismatch challenge.

2.

REFERENCES

[1] E. Amigó, J. C. de Albornoz, I. Chugur, A. Corujo, J. Gonzalo,
T. Martı́n, E. Meij, M. de Rijke, and D. Spina. Overview of
replab 2013: Evaluating online reputation monitoring systems.
In Information Access Evaluation. Multilinguality,
Multimodality, and Visualization, pages 333–352. Springer,
2013.
[2] M. Diab, T. Baldwin, and M. Baroni, editors. Second Joint
Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics.
Association for Computational Linguistics, Atlanta, Georgia,
USA, June 2013.
[3] A. Moschitti, S. Quarteroni, R. Basili, and S. Manandhar.
Exploiting syntactic and shallow semantic kernels for question
answer classification. In ACL-07, pages 776–783, 2007.
[4] W. Wu, Z. Lu, and H. Li. Learning bilinear model for matching
queries and documents. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 14(1):2519–2548,
Jan. 2013.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage, and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be
honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). Copyright is held by the
author/owner(s).
SIGIR’14, July 6–11, 2014, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.
ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07.

1296

