Seeking Simplicity in Search User Interfaces
Marti A. Hearst
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, California, USA
hearst@berkeley.edu

Abstract

Short Bio

It is rare for a new user interface to break through and
become successful, especially in information-intensive
tasks like search, coming to consensus or building up
knowledge. Most complex interfaces end up going unused.
Often the successful solution lies in a previously
unexplored part of the interface design space that is simple
in a new way that works just right.

Dr. Marti Hearst is a professor in the School of
Information at UC Berkeley, with an affiliate appointment
in the Computer Science Division. Her primary research
interests are user interfaces for search engines, information
visualization, natural language processing and, more
recently, improving MOOCs. She was recently named a
Fellow of the ACM, and has won two departmental
Excellence in Teaching Awards. She is also known for the
book Search User Interfaces and for the Flamenco project
which advanced faceted navigation as a standard search
technique, for lexico-syntactic patterns for ontology
discovery (“Hearst patterns”), the TextTiling discourse
segmentation technique, and the TileBars query term
visualization technique.

In this talk I will give examples of such successes in the
information-intensive interface design space, and attempt
to provide stimulating ideas for future research directions.
Categories and Subject Descriptors

H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information
Search and Retrieval – Search Process

Prof. Hearst is on the editorial board of ACM Transactions
on Computer-Human Interaction and was formerly on the
boards of ACM Transactions on the Web, Computational
Linguistics, ACM Transactions on Information Systems,
and IEEE Intelligent Systems. Prof. Hearst has received an
NSF CAREER award, an IBM Faculty Award, a Google
Research Award, and an Okawa Foundation Research
Grant.

Keywords
Search user interfaces; collaborative search; search engines; user
interface design.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage, and that copies bear this notice and the full
citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must
be honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). Copyright is held by the
author/owner(s).
SIGIR’14, July 6–11, 2014, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.
ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2617558

333

