Predicting Term-Relevance from Brain Signals
Manuel J. A. Eugster2,∗ , Tuukka Ruotsalo1,∗ , Michiel M. Spapé1,∗ ,
Ilkka Kosunen3 , Oswald Barral3 , Niklas Ravaja1,4 , Giulio Jacucci1,3 , Samuel Kaski2,3
Helsinki Institute for Information Technology HIIT
1
Aalto University, PO Box 15600, 00076, Finland
2
Aalto University, Department of Information and Computer Science, PO Box 15400, 00076, Finland
3
University of Helsinki, Department of Computer Science, PO Box 68, 00014, Finland
4
University of Helsinki, Department of Social Research, PO Box 54, 00014, Finland

first.last@hiit.fi
ABSTRACT

1.

Term-Relevance Prediction from Brain Signals (TRPB) is
proposed to automatically detect relevance of text information directly from brain signals. An experiment with
forty participants was conducted to record neural activity
of participants while providing relevance judgments to text
stimuli for a given topic. High-precision scientific equipment was used to quantify neural activity across 32 electroencephalography (EEG) channels. A classifier based on a
multi-view EEG feature representation showed improvement
up to 17% in relevance prediction based on brain signals
alone. Relevance was also associated with brain activity
with significant changes in certain brain areas. Consequently,
TRPB is based on changes identified in specific brain areas
and does not require user-specific training or calibration.
Hence, relevance predictions can be conducted for unseen
content and unseen participants. As an application of TRPB
we demonstrate a high-precision variant of the classifier that
constructs sets of relevant terms for a given unknown topic of
interest. Our research shows that detecting relevance from
brain signals is possible and allows the acquisition of relevance judgments without a need to observe any other user
interaction. This suggests that TRPB could be used in combination or as an alternative for conventional implicit feedback signals, such as dwell time or click-through activity.

INTRODUCTION

Relevance prediction is a central challenge of Information
Retrieval (IR) research as it determines the information presented to the user. In this paper, Term-Relevance Prediction
from Brain Signals (TRPB) is proposed to automatically detect relevance of information directly from brain signals. Research has begun to build an understanding of the neural activity associated with relevance detection [25], but 1) the exact brain areas associated with relevance judgments remain
unknown and 2) the methods to non-intrusively quantify the
neuronal activity can be very noisy [19]. Nevertheless, the
advantages of using brain signals to predict relevance are
1) that recording brain signals does not require any explicit
user interaction, and 2) the signals can be captured with
high throughput. That is, TRPB only requires participants
to examine text stimuli (e.g., text displayed on the screen),
and the signals can be continuously recorded. Consequently,
TRPB can be used in combination with or even as an alternative for conventional implicit feedback signals, such as
dwell time or click-through activity, that have been shown
to be unreliable and are tightly connected to conventional
user interfaces and explicit user interaction [13].
We use multi-view machine learning to solve the prediction problem and to cope with the uncertainties related to
active brain areas and signal noise. The multiple kernel
learning approach [9, 37] allows us to incorporate the traditionally complementary approaches to electroencephalography (EEG)—time-based (event-related potentials, ERPs)
and frequency-based—simultaneously in order to maximize
TRPB predictive power. We demonstrate that predicting
relevance judgments is possible from brain signals alone, i.e.,
without any explicit user interaction or brain-computer interface (BCI) training. The high throughput of brain signals
enables the capture of a huge number of relevance judgments
for text stimuli in a relatively short time. In practical applications it is possible to sacrifice recall and target high
precision to take advantage of the high throughput. We
demonstrate a high-precision variant of a relevance predictor, which is able to detect terms of the users’ given topics
of interest.
We conducted an experiment in which EEG signals of
40 participants were recorded when they judged relevance
of text stimuli. The main findings of TRPB using these
data are the following:

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Relevance
feedback; H.5.2 [User Interfaces]: Evaluation/Methodology

Keywords
Brain Signals; Relevance Prediction; EEG

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR’14, July 6–11, 2014, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07 ...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2609594.

∗

425

Equal contributions; authors in alphabetical order

1. EEG signals can be used to automatically predict relevance with an improvement of 17% in accuracy.

behavioral signals, such as dwell time and click-through activity, can be predictors of users’ information needs, they
can be noisy and unreliable [14, 40]. Collecting evidence of
click-through activity and dwell time also requires previous
explicit interaction between the user and the information
retrieval system as well as monitoring of the users over a
substantial amount of time. Explicit interaction is thus increasingly challenged by new information access media, such
as augmented reality interfaces, which can make collecting
conventional implicit feedback impractical, but allow wearable sensors to be used to capture additional user signals.
Sensory signals. Recently, sensory signals have been
utilized to measure human emotion and map emotional
states to predict relevance [27, 28]. Such sensors can detect
changes often expressed through a psychophysiology. Psychophysiology is reflected via cues, such as facial expressions,
changes in the electrodermal activity [2], or variations in the
skin temperature [6]. These physiological signals have provided researchers with additional sources of information not
previously available, and their effectiveness has been empirically studied [1, 2]. However, the results seem to be contradictory and validated only for image or video stimuli. These
media allow measuring users for extended periods of time,
which in itself is known to cause emotional responses and
more substantial physiological responses [24, 25].
Brain-Computer interfacing. A related research field
that has made use of EEG signals to allow (non-invasive) interfaces to control computers is brain-computer interfacing
(BCI). The key difference that sets BCI apart from our research is its requirement for user-specific memorizing. BCI
typically involves a user-specific training step in which the
user is required to memorize a motoric action, for instance,
pulling the left arm. The BCI system is then trained to
explicitly detect such previously established behavior [41]
in the control phase. Therefore, BCI does not detect the
associated, natural brain patterns related to relevance as
such, but creates an additional, “artificial” pattern requiring extensive, conscious training. Given that a detection of
relevance may also appear subliminal, the methods used in
BCI are of limited use for the present study.
Mind-Reading. Mind-reading aims to use neuroimaging, typically functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(fMRI), to learn specific patterns of brain activity with labeled object stimuli in order to predict each of these different labels on an instance-by-instance basis from the fMRI
data [23]. For example, when humans think of an object,
many different areas of the brain activate. This pattern can
then be learned by a machine learning system (based on
the blood-oxygen-level-dependent activity). Conversely, the
conventional neuroimaging research aims at finding correlates to external regressors such as task condition with activity in specific brain areas. The present approach to termrelevance prediction is similar to mind-reading in that we
likewise aim to directly associate brain patterns with users’
subjective perception of stimuli. However, the prediction of
relevance does not require association of specific patterns to
specific objects but rather abstracting of a general pattern
of brain activity in order to predict relevance for a stimulus.
Unique contributions. To our knowledge, our work is
the first to predict term-relevance from brain signals for an
IR scenario. What sets our research apart from the related
research is the following: 1) we use brain signals captured
via EEG alone without any other user signal, 2) we use text

2. Relevance prediction can be done independently of the
user, without requiring user-specific calibration.
3. A high-precision variant of the classifier can automatically construct term representations of topics of interest with a precision increase of 30% while still maintaining a feasible recall.
We were also able to confirm that the learned parameters
of the classifiers (kernel weights) gave pointers to significant
changes in brain activity. In an extended analysis we find
significant activity in brain areas that have previously been
found responsible for recognition and memory recall, and for
organizing, maintaining, and implementing intentions [18].
This supports TRPB from a cognitive science perspective.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the related work ranging from mind-reading to braincomputer interfacing and using sensory signals as relevance
feedback. Section 3 describes the experiment that was conducted to record participants’ neural activity. Section 4
presents the term-relevance prediction experiment, and Section 5 discusses the results of the experiments dividing them
into classification results (5.1) and physiological findings (5.2).
Section 6 demonstrates the effectiveness of TRPB in practice with a high-precision classifier. We conclude and discuss
the future work in Section 7.

2.

RELATED WORK

Our work is related to a range of research from understanding relevance as it is associated with brain activity,
operationalizing these associations as sensory input for predicting relevance as in relevance feedback research, interfacing between a computer and a human brain, and detecting
patterns form brain activity without explicitly looking for a
pre-known activity, as in mind-reading research.
Relevance. In information retrieval, relevance is a widely
operationalized concept. A huge body of research exists
that attempts to make use of relevance in practical systems,
such as relevance feedback for improving retrieval, or relevance judgement to produce ground truth for evaluation
purposes [36]. Cognitive scientists have long been interested in mapping basic cognitive functions that are highly
related to perceiving relevance (e.g., recognition and memory recall [32, 42]) and reacting to relevant stimuli (e.g.
implementing intentions [18]). The wealth of knowledge
from various fields underlines the fundamental complexity
of relevance, which may be the reason why the question of
“how does relevance happen in the brain” remains unanswered [25].
Relevance prediction. In information retrieval, relevance judgments of the presented information can be acquired from user interaction and behavior data. Previously,
researchers have made use of explicit [16], implicit [13], or
affective [1, 24] user signals and then used features extracted
from these signals to build models that can be used to automatically predict relevance of information. Among explicit
interactions, such as typing queries, implicit monitoring of
user actions has been found the most practical source of user
signal, since it is less intrusive for the user and does not require users to explicitly provide relevance judgments [13].
While previous research has found evidence that implicit

426

Figure 1: (a) A participant of the experiment with the full EEG sensor setup to record the raw EEG signals
reading the instructions for the next task. (b) Excerpt of the participant’s captured raw EEG signals showing
one trial from term onset to key press to the next term onset. The x-axis shows the time in milliseconds,
the y-axis the different EEG channels. The annotations show a typical pattern of an eye blink, horizontal
eye movements, and variation in the alpha frequencies. An artifact correction procedure was then applied to
remove, for example, eye movement related activity (see Section 3.4), before specific features were extracted
(see Section 3.5).
stimuli, 3) we aim to learn brain patterns that are naturally
associated with relevance judgments rather than to detect
artificial, memorized patterns or pre-seen objects, 4) we aim
for generalization over participants such that we can learn
the underlying patterns of brain activation and use them for
an unseen content and unseen participants.

3.

topics) terms defined by experts (column “Topic” in Table 4
lists all six topics; column “Predicted top 5 relevant terms”
gives an excerpt of the terms). We used a balanced setup,
i.e., for each topic three relevant and three irrelevant terms
were shown to the participant. We randomized the order of
the topics and the terms over participants. In addition, the
relevance-key assignment was balanced (right or left hand
used) between blocks of 12 trials to avoid possibly confounding hemispheric effect. The presented items were balanced
to be apriori 50% relevant and 50% irrelevant. This random baseline, although not entirely realistic, ensures that
we measure signals and effects related to relevance judgments and not, for example, related to the well-known P300
effect in an oddball-paradigm based experiment [10]. The recoded data reflect the user’s subjective relevance judgment
of the items (i.e., if a participant assessed the apriori irrelevant “Morse code” relevant for the topic “Iraq war”, it was
recoded as relevant), as this is the user’s real assignment
and the corresponding effect is what we would also expect
to predict from the brain signals.

NEURAL-ACTIVITY RECORDING
EXPERIMENT

We recorded the EEG signals of participants when they
assessed relevance in response to term stimuli shown on
a screen. The term stimuli were associated with a predetermined topic. For example, participants were asked to
judge relevance of terms “Snowmelt” and “hardware synchronization” for a topic “Climate change and global warming”
(the first term is relevant, the second term is irrelevant).
Terms were chosen to represent real search situations where
terms are not always clearly discriminative. For example,
the term “Morse code” is not clearly irrelevant for the topic
“Iraq war”, and participants might differ in their relevance
judgments. We used a highly controlled experimental setup
to avoid possibly confounding effects related to hemispheric
lateralization, eye-movements, and motor activity. For example, moving the eyes to read a word or moving the arm to
give the relevance judgment are visible in the brain signals
and can result in a classifier that learns, for example, the effect of the arm-movement and not the effect of the relevance
judgment.

3.1

3.2

Participants

Forty participants, 34 males and 6 females, took part in
the study. The age of the participants ranged from 21 years
to 47 years (Mean = 28.17, Median = 26.5). Most of them
were post-graduate (37), and the rest were undergraduate
students. Only two of the participants reported to be English native speakers, seventeen different mother tongues
being reported. Nevertheless, English reading skills were
overall reported as advanced (Mean = 4.55, Median = 5;
on a scale from 1 to 5). Six of the participants were lefthanded. Participants reported themselves as physically and
mentally healthy. Participation was compensated with two
movie tickets.

Experimental Design

Each participant judged relevance for six terms in six topics, for a total of 36 trials. The terms were randomly drawn
from a pool of relevant (for each topic) and irrelevant (for all

427

ysis algorithm [17], as implemented in the AAR toolbox [8],
was carried out in order to eliminate noise and potential
confounds of common artifacts such as eye movements and
blinks (see Figure 1).
Visual inspection of the raw data revealed extreme noise
levels for two participants (possible, for example, because of
loose electrodes or a cap which does not fit exactly). These
participants’ data were removed from further analysis, which
left us with S = 38 participants. In addition, we only considered judgments that conformed with the ground truth to
reduce noise induced by judgments possibly done by chance
when participants were not sure about their judgement.

Table 1: The outcome of the neural-activity recording experiment: For each term presented to a participant, we collected its binary relevance judgement. Then, seven views were computed with features based on the recorded EEG signal during a
certain period of time from term stimulus onset until corresponding relevance judgments. The 20 features represent the 20 most central channels F3, Fz,
F4, FC5, FC1, FC2, FC6, C3, Cz, C4, CP5, CP1,
CP2, CP6, P3, Pz, P4, O1, Oz, and O2.
Views vk Features
Relevance judgement view :

3.5

Relevance

A binary relevance judgement provided
by a participant for a term for a given
topic
Frequency-band-based views:
40 features for each frequency band:
Theta
1
20 features of average power over
Alpha
2
1 second epochs before the relevance
Beta
3
judgement; 20 features of average
Gamma1
4
power over entire period, minus power
Gamma2
5
of the second before term onset
Engage
6
Event-related-potential-based view :
ERPs

3.3

7

80 features of average amplitude: 20
features for 80–150 ms, P1; 20 features
for 150–250 ms, N1/P2; 20 features
for 250–450 ms, N2 or P3a; 20 features
for 450–800 ms: N4 or P3b

Procedure

At the beginning of the session the participants were
briefed as to the procedure and purpose of the experiment.
Then they were asked to sign an informed consent. They
were furthermore informed on their right to withdraw from
the experiment at any moment without any adverse consequence. The task was explained in more detail prior to the
execution. The participants were instructed to rate the text
stimulus either relevant or irrelevant by pressing either the
M-key (using the right hand) or the X-key (using the left
hand), on a QWERTY keyboard. They were instructed to
provide the relevance judgement by pressing the key as soon
as they were able to make the judgement. The next term was
presented as soon as the participants pressed the relevance
key. After the experiment, the participants were asked to
fill out an online questionnaire regarding their background
information.

3.4

Feature Engineering

Frequency-band-based features (FBF) and event-relatedpotential-based features (ERPF) were extracted from the
pre-processed signals. FBFs capture the change in the signals for the whole time window when the user was shown
the stimulus. ERPFs capture the changes in the signals
for a specific short time window when a participant makes
the relevance judgement—which can be a much shorter time
window and not necessarily at the time of giving the explicit
relevance judgement but, e.g., a few (milli)-seconds after the
term was shown on screen.
As no consensus exists on where and how binary relevance
judgments of text stimuli affect neural activity, it was not
possible to focus on, e.g., one specific frequency band or
brain area. Therefore, we engineered a set of different FBFs
and RPRFs in order to capture all the data that are potentially related to the relevance judgement. In both cases,
the EEG was time-locked to the start (i.e., term shown on
screen) or end (i.e., participant gave the relevance judgement) key events in the experiment. Table 1 gives a summary of the seven views and the corresponding features.
In order to maximize the cortical activity signal and minimize muscle-related activity and other artifactual noise, we
included only the 20 centrally located electrodes. To obtain
features, we calculated the power of the segment of 1 second
following the term onset using the fast Fourier transform and
applying log-transformation to normalize the signal. From
this, a baseline was subtracted by the same procedure over
the 1 second prior to the term onset.
Frequency-band-based views. An essential aspect of
electroencephalography (EEG) is that different types of oscillations, from the very slow theta (4–8 Hz) to the higher
gamma (80 Hz), have been associated with various psychological functions. For example, alpha activity has been related to attentiveness [3], theta activity to attention [22],
and alpha desynchronisation with semantic memory performance [15]. Possibly, decisions regarding relevance or irrelevance, through acts of motor imagery [21] and motor
control [38], would trigger activity in the beta frequency.
Finally, given previous indications of the role of gamma activity in consciousness [4], one might expect relevant search
results to be particularly accessible to consciousness and
thus be associated with gamma activity. Further evidence
for this comes from the observation that gamma-band oscillations have been associated with attentional information
processing through the salience of stimuli [12].
Furthermore, combinations of multiple frequency bands
have also been shown to account for cognitive functions. For
example, a combination of theta, alpha and beta bands has
been found to be an index of engagement [31], which we

EEG Recording and Processing

A QuickAmp (BrainProducts GmbH, Gilching, Germany)
amplifier recorded EEG at a sample rate of 100 Hz. EEG
was recorded from 30 Ag/AgCl scalp electrodes, positioned
using EasyCap elastic caps (EasyCap GmbH, Herrsching,
Germany) on equidistant electrode sites of the 10% system
excluding FT9/FT10. Figure 1 shows a participant with the
full EEG sensor setup. Processing of EEG was conducted in
EEGLAB [31] and included re-referencing to the common
average reference and filtering of the data between 1 and
80 Hz with a notch filter between 46 and 54 Hz to reduce
DC interference. After that, an automatic artifact correction, based on the Efficient Independent Component Anal-

428

4.1

therefore include here as another candidate. Other combinations of frequency bands were also tested from within the
multi-view model as will be discussed further on.
Event-related-potential-based view. Event-relatedpotentials (ERPs) are brain responses resulting from specific sensory, cognitive or motor events as measured using
EEG. Generally, as stimuli are sensed, the modality-specific
sensory areas in the brain are activated early, appearing in
the EEG as peaks with a specific topography, latency and
direction (negative or positive).
A set of ERPs have been associated with cognitive functions [20]. For example, the negative, fronto-central N2 has
been associated with uncertainty and cognitive control [7],
which could be related to the task of information retrieval.
The P3 potential occurs generally after 300 ms and is commonly separated in two sub-components called the P3a and
P3b. The P3a has more frontal topography than the P3b
and is associated with orientation and attention while the
P3b is related to memory processing and retrieval [30]. The
P3 is also one of the earliest potentials to be used for the
purposes of BCI [5].
As with the frequency analyses, no apriori decision was
made to exclude specific potentials. Instead, we calculated
the cross-individual average of the ERP and defined the intervals, based on the literature and visual inspection, to occur at 80–150 ms (P1), 150–250 ms (N1/P2), 250–450 ms
(N2 or P3a) and 450–800 ms (N4 or P3b) for all the 20 electrodes mentioned earlier, relative to the 200 ms prior to the
onset of the term, thus constituting 80 features in total.

4.

Multiple Kernel Learning

We use multiple kernel learning (MKL) support vector
machines [37] as a multi-view learning method to learn classification models of the form
y = f (v1 , . . . , vK ) =

K
X

βk hwk , Φk (vk )i + b,

k=1

given a set of relevance observations {ri }N
i=1 as learning
data. Here y denotes the binary relevance judgement, h·, ·i
the scalar product, wk the weight vector of the observations, Φk (vk ) the feature map of the view vk , βk the kernel
weights, and b the bias. The learning problem is to estimate the optimal kernel weights βk along with wk and b
from the given data. Using different feature maps (and consequently different kernels) allows us to represent the fact
that the different EEG signals can have different measures
of similarities, and we can capture nonlinear relationships
between features. The estimated kernel weights βk can be
used as an indication for the importance of the different
views [37], which, consequently, allows us to draw conclusions on the importance of individual EEG signals in predicting relevance.
For the concrete estimation of the classification models,
we use a Bayesian MKL algorithm with an efficient inference based on variational approximation [9]. Among other
advantages, the Bayesian formulation of MKL estimates the
predictive distribution of the class labels. We will later on
utilize the predictive distributions when constructing the
high-precision classifier (Section 6). For concrete details, especially on the actual model specification, the distributional
assumptions, and the formulation of the deterministic variational approximation, we refer to [9].

RELEVANCE PREDICTION FROM
BRAIN SIGNALS

Given the feature representation of the collected neuralactivity data, we studied:

4.2

Prediction Setup

Our prediction setup is based on the data of S = 38 participants and K = 7 views vk with features described in
Table 1. We computed models with different combinations
of views. We applied a leave-one-participant-out learning
strategy as follows. For each participant s we learned a classification model fs using the other participants’ data (i.e.,
the learning set Rs̄ = R \ Rs ) with the views that were
selected for the particular model (e.g., All views and Alpha+ERPs). The prediction accuracy was then computed
on the participant’s relevance observations, i.e., the test set
Rs . The learning of the models results in estimated observation weights wks̄ , kernel weights βks̄ , and the bias bs̄ .
We used an automatic feature selection procedure on each
view vk , whereby the features were ranked according to
the t-statistic (computed between the relevant and irrelevant observations) and the highest ranking features were
selected [35]—in our case the top ten features. Given the
selected features for each view vk , we normalized the data
and computed a Gaussian kernel with the kernel width defined as the median distance between the observations [11].
The number of relevance observations N s varies slightly
for each participant because we used only observations that
conformed to the ground truth. We established balanced
data by randomly drawing the learning set and the test set
from the set of relevant and the set of irrelevant observations,
each with the number of observations defined by the smaller
set. This reassembles our original experimental design and
is a simple but well-established strategy to exclude possi-

1. How well can we predict relevance judgments on terms
from the brain signals of unseen participants?
2. Which EEG views are important for the prediction?
The first question is motivated by real search situations in
which no user-specific training or calibration is necessarily
possible. The second question is motivated by the currently
unknown brain areas associated with relevance judgments;
an answer to this question allows us to draw some conclusions about the cognitive basis of the brain areas that are
found to be important for relevance prediction.
To answer these questions we have devised a set of binary relevant/irrelevant classification experiments based on
a multi-view learning method and a leave-one-participantout strategy. Multi-view learning is the task of learning from
two or more data sets with co-occurring observations. This
concept perfectly suits our scenario, and we used it by treating the different representations of the EEG signals as different views of a relevance judgement given by a participant.
Formally, each relevance observation ri = (yi , v1 , . . . , vK ) is
described by the binary relevance judgment yi and by K different feature vectors v· (i.e., views). For each participant s,
s
we have N s relevance observations, i.e., Rs = {r1s , . . . , rN
s}
is the set of relevance observations pertaining participant s.
The R = {R1 , . . . , RS } is the set of all relevance observations
across all participants.

429

Table 2: Classification results based on all 38 participants for different sets of views. The table lists the
mean classification accuracy, the p-value indicating a
significant better mean classification accuracy than
the random baseline, and the corresponding mean
improvement. Because of our experimental design,
the random baseline prediction of whether a term is
relevant or irrelevant is 0.5. Bold entries denote that
improvements are statistically significant at a level
of α = 0.01, p-value < α with correction for multiple
testing.
Mean
Mean
Views
accuracy
p-value improvement
All
0.5415
0.0003
8.30%
Individual views:
Alpha (Al)
Gamma1 (Ga1)
Beta (Be)
Gamma2
Theta
ERPs (E)
Engage
Selected combined

0.5242
0.5143
0.5005
0.5101
0.5000
0.5312
0.4773
views:

0.0265
0.1445
0.4838
0.2003
0.4984
0.0092
0.9673

4.83%
2.86%
0.10%
2.02%
0.01%
6.24%
−4.55%

Al+Ga1
Al+E
Ga1+E
Al+Ga1+Be
Al+Ga1+E

0.5429
0.5475
0.5528
0.5369
0.5586

0.0014
0.0007
0.0002
0.0022
<0.0001

8.59%
9.50%
10.55%
7.37%
11.72%

Figure 2: Individual classification accuracy for each
of the 38 participants with all seven views based on
training on the data of the remaining participants
and ordered according to the accuracy. TBRP generalizes for about 70% of the participants which follows the BCI illiteracy.

Table 3: Classification results for a restricted set of
participants motivated by the well-known “BCI illiteracy”. Bold entries denote that improvements are
statistically significant at a level of α = 0.01, p < α
with correction for multiple testing.
Mean
Mean
Views
# accuracy
p-value improvement
All 26
0.5750
<0.0001
15.00%

ble problems of the classification method with imbalanced
classes. To eliminate a possible observation sampling bias
we repeated this procedure five times; i.e., for a participant s
we estimated five models fsi (i = 1, . . . , 5) and consequently
five estimations of model parameters. We report averaged
results, unless otherwise noted.

5.

Al+Ga1
Al+E
Ga1+E
Al+Ga1+Be
Al+Ga1+E

RESULTS

In this section, we first present results from classification
experiments with various combinations of EEG views. We
discuss the importance and influence of the various EEG
views and—encouraged by the well-known “BCI illiteracy”—
we show that there exists a restricted set of participants for
which we can further improve the prediction accuracy. We
then show physiological findings that map the important
views to effects that can be localized to certain brain areas.

5.1

28
25
26
25
28

0.5641
0.5853
0.5792
0.5490
0.5545

<0.0001
<0.0001
<0.0001
0.0019
0.0005

12.82%
17.06%
15.83%
9.81%
10.89%

importance of each EEG view. Alpha and Gamma1 have
the highest weights, then Beta, then Gamma2, Theta and
ERPs, and finally Engage. To study the influence of different views on the classification accuracy, we built models for each view separately. The corresponding results are
shown in the middle block of Table 2. These single-view
runs indicated that none of the individual views alone led
to significant improvements. However, we found that Alpha and ERPs showed good performances (0.52/4.83% and
0.53/6.24%, respectively), which was in line with the kernel
weights. Influenced by these results, we also computed classification models by combining the best-performing views
and the views with highest kernel weights.
The corresponding classification results with combined
sets of views are shown in the lower block of Table 2. The
best set of views was found to be the one with the Alpha,
Gamma1, and ERPs (0.56/11.72%). Other significant improvements were achieved with classification models based
on Alpha and ERPs, and Gamma1 and ERPs. Even though
Beta had a high kernel weight, it did not significantly im-

Classification Performances

Table 2 summarizes the classification accuracies for different sets of views. We report the mean classification accuracy, improvement over the random baseline, and the p-value
of a t-test for significance corrected for multiple testing using the Bonferroni correction. The t-test was applicable because the Shapiro-Wilk test showed no significant difference
from the normal distribution. The classifiers using all seven
EEG views (All) predicted relevant and irrelevant terms for
an unseen participant significantly better than the random
baseline, and achieved a mean improvement of 8.30%.
Importance and influence of EEG views. The estimated kernel weights βk of all learned classification models using all seven views gave us a first indication of the

430

Figure 3: Visualizations of physiological findings based on all 38 participants (details in Section 5.2): (a,
top) Localization of the Alpha change associated with relevance mapped to a normalized brain space. Horizontal and sagittal slice show an area of maximum change with peak significant area localized in the Brodmann
Area 10, which has been associated with a range of cognitive functions that are important for relevance judgments, such as recognition, semantic processing, memory recall, and intentional planning. (a, bottom) Topography of the event-related potential in the interval between 450 and 747 ms after irrelevant (left) and
relevant (right) term onset. Peak significant difference was found in the Pz channel. (b) The corresponding
ERP signal at the Pz channel shows the significant difference between relevant and irrelevant after 450 ms,
maximizing at 747 ms.
prove the classification accuracy when combined with Alpha
and Gamma1. In summary, this suggests that changes in
Alpha, Gamma1, and ERPs activities are associated with
term-relevance judgments. The physiological findings presented in the next section support these results for Alpha
and ERPs.
“BCI illiteracy” analogy. Motivated by the well-known
“BCI illiteracy”, which means that BCI control does not
work for a non-negligible proportion of participants (ca. 1530%, [39]), we were interested to find out whether a similar effect could be observed in TRPB. In detail, we studied whether we could achieve a better classification accuracy for a specific group of participants. Figure 2 shows
the classification accuracy of the classification models using all views; the horizontal line at 0.5 marks the random
baseline. 26 participants are above, and 12 participants are
below the random baseline. This proportion suggests that
capturing the relevance effect is generalizable for 70% of the
participants and not generalizable for about 30% of the participants, which follows the BCI illiteracy rate mentioned
in [39].
A screening of the EEG signals of the 12 participants did
not show a higher noise level, which would explain the worsethan-random prediction accuracy. Given that the learning
data for these cases are the other participants (leave-oneparticipant-out strategy), there may be a group of participants with similar brain signals. There seems, however, to
be a group of participants with possibly different brain signals. In order to investigate if we could achieve further classification improvements, we investigated an additional set
of classification models for a restricted set of participants.
The restricted set was determined via a simple trial-and-

error procedure: i.e., we included all participants with an
accuracy above the random baseline.
Table 3 shows the corresponding classification results for
the restricted set of participants. The results indicate that
it is possible to increase the mean prediction accuracy and
therefore the mean improvement in all cases; in the best
case up to 17% (Alpha and ERPs). Because the simple trialand-error procedure, these analyses do not provide generalizable results over all participants. This procedure, however,
allowed us to demonstrate an analogy to the well-known
“BCI illiteracy” effect.

5.2

Physiological Findings

The views that were found most effective for the classification (Alpha and ERPs) were investigated from a physiological point of view. We present brain mappings of the average
Alpha effect across all 38 participants and the topography
of the strong ERP effect.
Alpha. We attempted to localize the intracranial source
of the Alpha using exact low resolution electromagnetic tomography (eLORETA, [29]). eLORETA is a discrete distributed linear weighted minimum norm inverse solution to
the source localization of scalp recorded activity, yielding
images with exact localization, at a cost of a low spatial resolution. For each participant, two large 1024 ms segments of
relevant versus irrelevant terms were used to calculate the
cross spectra across all electrodes resulting in 6000 voxels
for both relevant and irrelevant terms for each participant.
In order to localize the Alpha change associated with relevance, we used a pairwise log of F -ratio test across voxels
using spatial normalization to find a maximally significant
source localization (with correction for multiple testing [26]).

431

Table 4: Results of the high-precision classifier based on all 38 participants and all seven views. The average
top 5 terms are shown. The terms which are relevant according to the ground truth are in normal font,
irrelevant terms according to the ground truth are in italics. Note that, e.g., the irrelevant term “morse
code” in the topic “Iraq war” is predicted. A possible explanation is that brain signals associated with “morse
code” being relevant for this topic were detected even tough participants finally decided to judge the term
as irrelevant.
Count
Topic
Precision Recall Top 5 relevant terms
all relevant
Climate change and global warming 209
111
0.52
0.02
Snowmelt, Elevated CO2, Climate change,
hardware synchronization, sightseeing
Entrepreneurship

199

110

0.69

0.18

business risk, startup company, business creation, shopping, virtual relationships

Immigration integration

204

105

0.52

0.10

citizenship, ethnic diversity, xenophobia, arsonist, morse code

Intelligent vehicles

185

109

0.80

0.11

pedestrian tracking, collision sensing, remote
driving, radar vision, arsonist

Iraq war

208

111

0.63

0.15

Saddam Hussein, US army, Tony Blair, morse
code, rock n roll

Precarious employment

204

106

0.57

0.11

minimum wage, employment regulation, job
instability, virtual relationships, video-games

Mean

202

109

0.62

0.13

The analysis based on the obtained corrected critical twosided F ∗ = .37 results in an area of 10 voxels, all located in
the left frontal lobe, specifically in Brodmann Area 10 and
a peak localization at MNI coordinates (−25, 55, 25) with a
corrected p < 0.02; see Figure 3(a, top). The source localization of the effect on alpha oscillations supports the key
role of the frontal lobe. The Brodmann Area 10 has previously been related to recognition [32], memory retrieval [33],
and the evaluation of working memory [42].
ERPs. To investigate which components of the ERP contribute most to the model, we analyzed the average difference between relevant and irrelevant terms also in a more
traditional manner. Average relevant and irrelevant ERPs
were computed for each participant over a minimum of 8
and a maximum of 16 correctly classified epochs in each
condition. The main significant areas were observed in the
Cz, Pz, C4, and P4 channels, with the peak difference in
Pz beginning at 477 ms (p < .05) and peaking at 757 ms
(p < .0001); see Figure 3(a, bottom) and Figure 3(b). The
latency and topography of the potential suggest the involvement of a P3-like potential. The high latency and parietal
topography coincide with the P3b, thus suggesting that relevance does not affect an early change in orientation, but a
later, memory-related effect [30].

6.

high throughput—compared to implicit signals that require
explicit user interaction. As a result, a large number of relevance judgments can be observed in a relatively short time.
We demonstrate such a high-precision variant of the TRPB
classifier and show that it can construct meaningful sets of
terms for unknown topics and unseen participants.

6.1

Prediction Setup

One of the advantages of the Bayesian MKL algorithm
introduced in Section 4.1 is that its outcome for an unseen
term y is not simply the binary decision to relevant or irrelevant, but the predictive distribution of the term being
relevant, i.e., p(y = relevant | θ) with θ the estimated model
parameters. We built a high-precision TRPB variant by
predicting a term to be relevant only if the probability was
higher than 0.99. We used the same prediction setup as in
Section 4.2; the models are based on all 38 participants and
all seven views. The learned classification models were used
to predict the relevance of the terms for an unseen participant and an unknown topic. We then quantified the predicted relevant terms per topic over all unseen participants,
which let us to compute the top relevant terms per topic for
an average unseen participant.

6.2

HIGH-PRECISION TRPB

Results

The results of the high-precision classifier in predicting
relevant terms are shown in Table 4. For each of the six
topics, we show the number of observations used in the prediction, precision, and recall achieved by the high-precision
classifier, and the terms predicted relevant by the classifier.
While the overall classification problem is still hard, the
high-precision classifier achieves a mean precision of 0.62
with an improvement of 25% from the baseline while still
sustaining feasible recall of 0.13. However, there are differences in precision across the topics ranging from 0.52 up
to 0.8. This suggests that some terms in some topics may
have been more difficult for the participants than others.

In a practical information retrieval application that can
benefit from relevance prediction, the target is to detect true
positive examples of terms that represent user’s search intent [34]. In such applications, a classifier that trades recall
for the benefit of precision can be used to maximize user
experience. In other words, a classifier predicts a term as
relevant only if the estimated probability of being relevant
is very high, i.e., above a certain threshold (high precision).
Obviously, the classifier will miss a lot of true relevant terms
(low recall). However, we can take advantage of the fact
that brain signals can be captured continuously and with

432

For example, for the “Entrepreneurship” topic, the classifier
was used to classify 199 samples, of which 110 were relevant and the rest were irrelevant. The high-precision classifier reconstructed 29 terms from these samples, of which
20 were relevant and 9 irrelevant, and achieved a precision
of 0.69 and recall of 0.18. The top five terms for this topic
were “business risk”, “startup company”, “business creation”,
“shopping”, and “virtual relationships”. While “shopping”
and “virtual relationships” were not relevant for the topic in
the strict sense (in the ground truth), they were still predicted relevant by the high-precision classifier. One may
argue that these terms are still somewhat relevant for the
topic. Similar is the effect of the classifier picking a term that
was classified relevant, but assessed irrelevant in the ground
truth, is for example the term “Morse code” for the topic
“Iraq war” or the term “virtual relationships” for the topic
“Precarious employment”. This suggests that the classifier
can possibly detect the correct brain pattern of a participant
first thinking that the term may be relevant, even when the
participant still ends up assessing it irrelevant.

7.

our results generalize to such scenarios. Second, our classification results already generalize over unseen participants,
but more sophisticated EEG processing steps and advanced
detection methods are needed to automatically cope with
the detected “BCI illiteracy” analogy. Third, an obvious
next step is to use the predictions as relevance feedback and
to quantify the effectiveness of EEG-based relevance feedback as a part of a real interactive IR system. Fourth, we
recognize a need for studies that could more specifically reveal the areas of the brain that are activated when users
conduct relevance judgements. This could help to reveal the
plurality of different mental operations potentially associated with relevance and allow to build non-intrusive wearable EEG systems that could rely on a small number of
electrodes at specific positions.
In conclusion, our findings open a horizon for adaptive
information retrieval systems that can detect relevance directly from brain signals without requiring users to engage
with any particular interaction technique or user interface.
With the current trend of wireless, light weight, and portable
EEG sensors, our findings can enable systems, which analyze
relevance as it happens as a part of our everyday information
seeking activities.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

In essence, relevance judgments happen in the brain and
therefore the most intriguing way to predict relevance is to
directly use the brain signals. Brain signals also have advantages over the more conventional sources of user signals
from a practical IR point of view. The recording of the
relevance judgments do not require any explicit user interaction, such as user actively clicking on items. The signals
can be captured with higher throughput than from explicit
user interaction signals. Most practical information retrieval
systems assume the interface between the content and the
user to be based on user’s expression of the information need
using a term representation. Therefore, in order to operationalize brain signals as a part of a real IR system, a central
challenge is to predict the relevance of terms based on the
brain signals.
We showed that term-relevance prediction using only
brain signals captured via EEG is possible. The classification results showed significantly better performances than
the random baseline. As a practical application of TRPB,
we demonstrated a high-precision relevance predictor and
showed that it can construct meaningful sets of terms for
unknown topics and unseen participants. To our knowledge, this is the first work utilizing only brain signals as
a source for relevance in an IR scenario. Our approach does
not require users to explicitly memorize an artificial pattern
or a pre-seen object as in BCI or mind-reading research.
Moreover, our approach is based on well-established methods, both for the EEG processing and the prediction task,
and we were able to support the classification results with
physiological findings. The localized brain areas have previously been associated with cognitive functions important
for relevance judgments.
While our results show significant improvements, we see
several future research directions in order to utilize TRPB
as a part of a real IR system. First, our experimental design
is balanced between relevant and irrelevant terms in order
to ensures that we measure signals and effects related to relevance judgments. In a real IR setting, however, it is likely
that the two classes are imbalanced with the majority of the
terms being irrelevant. Experiments with more realistic data
and larger amount of observations are needed to show how

8.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work has been partly supported by the Academy of
Finland (Multivire, 255725; and the Finnish Centre of Excellence in Computational Inference Research COIN, 251170),
Re:Know funded by TEKES, and MindSee (FP7 – ICT;
Grant Agreement # 611570).

9.

REFERENCES

[1] I. Arapakis, K. Athanasakos, and J. M. Jose. A comparison
of general vs personalised affective models for the
prediction of topical relevance. In Proceedings of the 33rd
international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and
development in information retrieval, SIGIR ’10, pages
371–378, New York, NY, USA, 2010. ACM.
[2] I. Arapakis, I. Konstas, and J. M. Jose. Using facial
expressions and peripheral physiological signals as implicit
indicators of topical relevance. In Proceedings of the 17th
ACM International Conference on Multimedia, MM ’09,
pages 461–470, New York, NY, USA, 2009. ACM.
[3] H. Berger. Über das Elektrenkephalogramm des Menschen.
Archiv für Psychiatrie und Nervenkrankheiten,
87(1):527–570, 1929.
[4] F. Crick and C. Koch. A framework for consciousness.
Nature Neuroscience, 6:119–126, 2003.
[5] L. Farwell and E. Donchin. Talking off the top of your
head: Toward a mental prosthesis utilizing event-related
brain potentials. Electroencephalography and Clinical
Neurophysiology, 70(6):510–523, 1988.
[6] B. Figner and R. O. Murphy. Using Skin Conductance in
Judgment and Decision Making Research. A Handbook of
process tracing methods for decision research: A critical
review and user’s guide, pages 163–184, 2010.
[7] J. R. Folstein and C. Van Petten. Influence of cognitive
control and mismatch on the N2 component of the ERP: A
review. Psychophysiology, 45(1):152–170, 2008.
[8] G. Gomez-Herrero, W. De Clercq, H. Anwar, O. Kara,
K. Egiazarian, S. Van Huffel, and W. Van Paesschen.
Automatic removal of ocular artifacts in the EEG without
an EOG reference channel. In Signal Processing
Symposium, 2006. NORSIG 2006. Proceedings of the 7th
Nordic, pages 130–133, 2006.
[9] M. Gönen. Bayesian efficient multiple kernel learning. In
J. Langford and J. Pineau, editors, Proceedings of the 29th

433

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML-12), pages 1–8, New York, NY, USA, 2012. ACM.
C. J. Gonsalvez and J. Polich. P300 amplitude is
determined by target-to-target interval. Psychophysiology,
39(3):388–396, 2002.
A. Gretton, K. M. Borgwardt, M. J. Rasch, B. Schölkopf,
and A. Smola. A kernel two-sample test. The Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 13:723–773, 2012.
T. Gruber, M. M. Müller, and A. Keil. Modulation of
induced gamma band responses in a perceptual learning
task in the human EEG. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 14(5):732–744, July 2002.
T. Joachims, L. Granka, B. Pan, H. Hembrooke, and
G. Gay. Accurately interpreting clickthrough data as
implicit feedback. In Proceedings of the 28th annual
international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and
development in information retrieval, SIGIR ’05, pages
154–161, New York, NY, USA, 2005. ACM.
D. Kelly and N. J. Belkin. Display time as implicit
feedback: Understanding task effects. In Proceedings of the
27th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on
Research and Development in Information Retrieval, SIGIR
’04, pages 377–384, New York, NY, USA, 2004. ACM.
W. Klimesch. EEG alpha and theta oscillations reflect
cognitive and memory performance: a review and analysis.
Brain Research Reviews, 29(2,3):169–195, 1999.
J. Koenemann and N. J. Belkin. A case for interaction: A
study of interactive information retrieval behavior and
effectiveness. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’96, pages
205–212, New York, NY, USA, 1996. ACM.
Z. Koldovsky, P. Tichavsky, and E. Oja. Efficient variant of
algorithm FastICA for independent component analysis
attaining the Cramér-Rao lower bound. Neural Networks,
IEEE Transactions on, 17(5):1265–1277, 2006.
A. Lagioia, S. Eliez, M. Schneider, J. S. Simons,
M. Van der Linden, and M. Debban. Neural correlates of
reality monitoring during adolescence. NeuroImage,
55(3):1393–1400, 2011.
F. Lotte, M. Congedo, A. Lécuyer, F. Lamarche, and
B. Arnaldi. A Review of Classification Algorithms for
EEG-based Brain-Computer Interfaces. Journal of Neural
Engineering, 4(2), June 2007.
S. J. Luck. An Introduction to the Event-Related Potential
Technique (Cognitive Neuroscience). MIT Press, 1 edition,
2005.
D. J. McFarland, L. A. Miner, T. M. Vaughan, and J. R.
Wolpaw. Mu and beta rhythm topographies during motor
imagery and actual movements. Brain Topography,
12(3):177–186, 2000.
P. Missonnier, M.-P. Deiber, G. Gold, P. Millet,
M. Gex-Fabry Pun, L. Fazio-Costa, P. Giannakopoulos, and
V. Ibáñez. Frontal theta event-related synchronization:
Comparison of directed attention and working memory load
effects. Journal of Neural Transmission,
113(10):1477–1486, 2006.
T. M. Mitchell, S. V. Shinkareva, A. Carlson, K. M. Chang,
V. L. Malave, R. A. Mason, and M. A. Just. Predicting
human brain activity associated with the meanings of
nouns. Science, 320(4880):1191–1195, 2013.
Y. Moshfeghi and J. M. Jose. An effective implicit
relevance feedback technique using affective, physiological
and behavioural features. In Proceedings of the 36th
international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and
development in information retrieval, SIGIR ’13, pages
133–142, New York, NY, USA, 2013. ACM.
Y. Moshfeghi, L. R. Pinto, F. E. Pollick, and J. M. Jose.
Understanding Relevance: An fMRI Study. In
P. Serdyukov, P. Braslavski, S. Kuznetsov, J. Kamps,
S. Rüger, E. Agichtein, I. Segalovich, and E. Yilmaz,
editors, Advances in Information Retrieval, volume 7814 of

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]
[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]
[40]

[41]

[42]

434

Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 14–25. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2013.
T. E. Nichols and A. P. Holmes. Nonparametric
permutation tests for functional neuroimaging: A primer
with examples. Human Brain Mapping, 15(1):1–25, 2002.
M. Pantic and L. J. M. Rothkrantz. Automatic analysis of
facial expressions: The state of the art. IEEE Transactions
in Pattern Analysis Machine Intelligence,
22(12):1424–1445, Dec. 2000.
M. Pantic and L. J. M. Rothkrantz. Toward an
affect-sensitive multimodal human-computer interaction.
Proceedings of the IEEE, 91(9):1370–1390, 2003.
R. D. Pascual-Marqui, C. M. Michel, and D. Lehmann. Low
resolution electromagnetic tomography: A new method for
localizing electrical activity in the brain. International
Journal of Psychophysiology, 18(1):49–65, 1994.
J. Polich. Updating p300: An integrative theory of P3a and
P3b. Clinical Neurophysiology, 118(10):2128–2148, 2007.
A. T. Pope, E. H. Bogart, and D. S. Bartolome.
Biocybernetic system evaluates indices of operator
engagement in automated task. Biological Psychology,
40(1–2):187–195, 1995. EEG in Basic and Applied Settings.
C. Ranganath, M. K. Johnson, and M. Desposito.
Prefrontal activity associated with working memory and
episodic long-term memory. Neuropsychologia,
41(3):378–389, 2003. Functional Neuroimaging of Memory.
M. D. Rugg, P. C. Fletcher, C. D. Frith, R. S. J.
Frackowiak, and R. J. Dolan. Differential activation of the
prefrontal cortex in successful and unsuccessful memory
retrieval. Brain, 119:2073–2083, 1996.
T. Ruotsalo, J. Peltonen, M. Eugster, D. Glowacka,
K. Konyushkova, K. Athukorala, I. Kosunen, A. Reijonen,
P. Myllymäki, G. Jacucci, and S. Kaski. Directing
exploratory search with interactive intent modeling. In
Proceedings of the 22nd ACM international conference on
Conference on information and knowledge management,
CIKM ’13, pages 1759–1764, New York, NY, USA, 2013.
ACM.
Y. Saeys, I. Inza, and P. Larrañaga. A review of feature
selection techniques in bioinformatics. Bioinformatics,
23(19):2507–2517, 2007.
T. Saracevic. Relevance: A review of the literature and a
framework for thinking on the notion in information
science. part III: Behavior and effects of relevance. Journal
of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology, 58(13):2126–2144, Nov. 2007.
S. Sonnenburg, G. Rätsch, C. Schäfer, and B. Schölkopf.
Large scale multiple kernel learning. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 7:1531–1565, 2006.
M. M. Spapé and D. J. Serrien. Interregional synchrony of
visuomotor tracking: Perturbation effects and individual
differences. Behavioural Brain Research, 213(2):313–318,
2010.
C. Vidaurre and B. Blankertz. Towards a cure for BCI
illiteracy. Brain Topography, 23(2):194–198, 2010.
R. W. White and D. Kelly. A study on the effects of
personalization and task information on implicit feedback
performance. In Proceedings of the 15th ACM International
Conference on Information and Knowledge Management,
CIKM ’06, pages 297–306, New York, NY, USA, 2006.
ACM.
J. R. Wolpaw, N. Birbaumer, D. J. McFarland,
G. Pfurtscheller, and T. M. Vaughan. Brain-computer
interfaces for communication and control. Clinical
Neurophysiology, 113(6):767–791, 2002.
J. X. Zhfang, H.-C. Leung, and M. K. Johnson. Frontal
activations associated with accessing and evaluating
information in working memory: an fMRI study.
NeuroImage, 20(3):1531–1539, 2003.

