Using Information Scent and Need for Cognition to
Understand Online Search Behavior
Wan-Ching Wu

Diane Kelly

Avneesh Sud

SILS
University of North Carolina
Chapel Hill, NC, 27599 USA

SILS
University of North Carolina
Chapel Hill, NC, 27599 USA

Microsoft
One Microsoft Way,
Redmond, WA, 98052 USA

wanchinw@email.unc.edu

dianek@email.unc.edu

avneesh.sud@microsoft.com

one or more of the results, paginate to the next SERP, issue another
query or end their search task. While many studies have used search
log analysis to model these types of search behaviors (e.g., [16]
[42]), the goal of many of these studies has been to learn from large
scale data a parsimonious set of the most important features to
predict future search behavior. While these studies provide much in
the way of description and prediction, they offer few theoretical
explanations as to why people engage in certain search behaviors.
In this study, we investigate the extent to which two theories,
Information Scent [33] and Need for Cognition [6], explain
people’s search behaviors when interacting with SERPs.

ABSTRACT
The purpose of this study is to investigate the extent to which two
theories, Information Scent and Need for Cognition, explain
people’s search behaviors when interacting with search engine
results pages (SERPs). Information Scent, the perception of the
value of information sources, was manipulated by varying the
number and distribution of relevant results on the first SERP. Need
for Cognition (NFC), a personality trait that measures the extent to
which a person enjoys cognitively effortful activities, was
measured by a standardized scale. A laboratory experiment was
conducted with forty-eight participants, who completed six openended search tasks. Results showed that while interacting with
SERPs containing more relevant documents, participants examined
more documents and clicked deeper in the search result list. When
interacting with SERPs that contained the same number of relevant
results distributed across different ranks, participants were more
likely to abandon their queries when relevant documents appeared
later on the SERP. With respect to NFC, participants with higher
NFC paginated less frequently and paid less attention to results at
lower ranks than those with lower NFC. The interaction between
NFC and the number of relevant results on the SERP affected the
time spent on searching and a participant’s likelihood to
reformulate, paginate and stop. Our findings suggest evaluating
system effectiveness based on the first page of results, even for
tasks that require the user to view multiple documents, and varying
interface features based on NFC.

Information scent is part of Information Foraging Theory, which
compares information-seeking behavior to the food foraging
behaviors of animals [33]. Just as animals use environmental cues
to identify the most useful places to forage for food, human beings
look for information from sources they believe are the most costeffective by making predictive judgments using proximal cues.
Examples of proximal cues include snippets, thumbnails and URLs.
These proximal cues provide information scent, which emphasizes
their utility in suggesting the relevance of some distal content.
While previous work has examined the relationship between the
information scent of individual search result surrogates (i.e.,
snippets) on search behavior [25][29], in this work, we propose that
the initial search result page can be viewed as a surrogate for the
entire set of results retrieved for a query, and examine how the
information scent level, or the number of relevant results, and
information scent pattern, or the distribution of relevant results, of
the initial SERP influence people’s search behaviors.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search
and Retrieval - search process.

In this study, we also investigate how Need for Cognition (NFC), a
personality trait that measures the extent to which a person enjoys
cognitively effortful activities, impacts search behaviors. Interest in
personality-based designs has been growing in the HCI community
and is motivated by the assumption that people with different
personality traits will respond differently to design cues and
interact in different ways with systems [32]. While many studies in
information science have investigated the effect of individual
differences such as cognitive styles, gender and age on search
behavior (e.g., [17]), the relationship between personality and
search behavior has received relatively less attention, especially in
IR. Moreover, several IR evaluation measures include parameters
that can be tuned based on individual user characteristics such as
patience (e.g., nDCG [23]). However, no research has been done to
investigate potential characteristics that might impact a person’s
willingness to examine a search results list. One possible
personality trait from the psychological literature that may
influence search behavior is Need for Cognition (NFC). Research
has shown that people with higher NFC spend more time evaluating
ideas and information, and solving problems [8]. Given that search
is a cognitive activity and that people with higher levels of NFC
spend more time processing and evaluating information, we were
interested in examining whether and how differences in NFC

Keywords
Search Stopping; Search Behavior; personality; Need for
Cognition; Information Scent; Search Depth; Query
Reformulation; Pagination; Search Strategies.

1. INTRODUCTION
Online searching can be conceptualized as an iterative decisionmaking process. After an initial query is submitted, a searcher
examines a search engine results page (SERP) and decides to select
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned
by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from
permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR’14, July 6–11, 2014, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07…$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2609626

557

impact how many queries a person enters, how deep they go in the
search results list and when they decide to stop searching.

interface. These results suggest that certain aspects of the search
interface can impact search behavior and also provide a theoretical
explanation for this behavior.

2. RELATED WORK

2.3 Search Stopping

The section reviews work related to the search behaviors we are
most interested in: query reformulations, search depth, and search
stopping. This is followed by an overview of research related to
information scent and need for cognition.

Search stopping is generally used to describe the point a person
decides he or she has enough information to complete his or her
search task. Terms such as stopping behavior, search termination,
searcher patience or search persistence have been used to describe
this phenomenon, but no formal definition or models have been
provided in the literature. To date, the search stopping literature
covers issues related to stopping rules for determining when people
have found enough information or when they declare search a
failure [5][12][13][28][31][34], search patterns and effort
preceding a stopping point [30][40], the relationship between
situational and individual differences on stopping [34][44], and the
consequences of different search stopping decisions [29]. The
majority of these studies have used interviews to understand when
people decide to stop and have concluded that stopping decisions
are based on intuition, or “the feeling of good enough” [44]. Only
a few studies have attempted to quantitatively characterize and
predict stopping. For example, Kraft and Lee [27] modeled
expected search length through mathematical approximations using
stopping rules including the satiation rule, the disgust rule, and the
combination rule. This study, though, was in the context of batchmode searching, rather than interactive searching. More recently,
Toms and Freund [40] studied actions that preceded stopping in
online information seeking in order to predict stopping and found
that the most prevalent stopping pattern included issuing a query,
examining results and viewing a page. Dostert and Kelly [15] found
that when participants stopped they believed they found most of the
relevant information, but in reality they had only identified 51-60%
of relevant information. This study was one of the first attempts to
quantify the sense of “feeling good enough.”

2.1 Query Reformulation
Literature on query reformulations can be divided into computergenerated query suggestions and query rewriting, and humangenerated reformulations. This section is dedicated to the latter,
with a focus on Web search reformulation behavior. There have
been a number of studies that have analyzed queries and query
reformulations, and created classifications of query reformulation
strategies. For example, Anick [1] classified 100 query
reformulations into 11 functional categories, such as location,
acronym, and alternative. Rieh and Xie [36] analyzed 313 Web
search logs and reported three facets of query reformulations:
content, format and source. Huang and Efthimiadis [19] proposed
a taxonomy based on the lexical qualities of queries and evaluated
the effectiveness of different query reformulation strategies. They
concluded the effectiveness of query reformulation strategies
depends on the user’s reaction to the first set of results retrieved.
Spink [39] analyzed Excite search logs and found that users
typically entered 2.84 queries per session, and in about two-thirds
of the sessions, there were query reformulations. Jansen and Spink
[22] surveyed nine search engine logs from 1997 to 2002 and found
that there was an increase in query reformulations. Jansen et al. [21]
analyzed search logs collected from 2005 and found that about 40%
of query occurrences were reformulations, yet it was unclear how
these reformulations were connected to user sessions. Recently,
Hassan et al. [18] used clicks and query reformulations as indicators
of search satisfaction. The researchers found query reformulations
were a strong indicator of task difficulty and task failure. Moreover,
queries associated with unsuccessful tasks were more similar to one
another than queries associated with successful tasks. These
findings provide useful perspectives for understanding the
relationships between query reformulations and stopping.

2.4 Information Scent
Information scent, a component of Information Foraging Theory, is
the subjective perception of the value and cost of information
sources from proximal cues, such as search result snippets
representing the page content [10][33]. Pirolli and his colleagues
have used information scent in a number of studies to better
understand web search behavior [9][10][11]. For example, Chi et
al. [10][11] developed and evaluated a computational method to
predict surfing paths based on given information needs and starter
pages. Card et al. [9] observed that if a person started with a high
information scent web page, he or she would visit more web pages
at the site. They also found that as the information scent of web
pages declined, there was a tendency for the person to leave the site
or return to a previously visited page. Information scent has also
been used to better understand how people evaluate search results.
Loumakis et al. [29] investigated how the information scent
associated with images on SERPs impacted evaluation behavior.
They found that when images were added to text snippets,
regardless of image quality, participants were more confident they
could find an answer. However, the researchers studied simple factfinding tasks and did not investigate the effects of information scent
on search behavior. Kammerer et al. [25] found that by adding
source cues to search result snippets, searchers paid less attention
to commercial search results and selected more results from
authoritative sources than when source cues were not available.
However, participants were provided 30 results to “select” from
rather than to “search;” therefore, the effect of information scent on
search behaviors in relation to SERPs remains unclear.

2.2 Search Depth
Studies about search depth have reported the depth on a ranked
search result list at which searchers stop clicking, mouse hovering,
or gazing before re-querying. A series of studies from the early
2000’s examined queries from the Excite search engine and
observed that people typically examined 1.7 pages per query and
for about 50% of the queries, searchers went to the next page before
reformulating their queries [39]. The researchers also found that
search depth decreased over time; the trend of viewing only the
initial SERP increased from 29% to 73% in US-based search
engines from 1997 to 2002 [22]. Pagination has rarely been
observed in recent studies. Cutrell and Guan’s eye tracking study
reported that people examined the first eight results before they reissued another query [14]. Lorigo et al. [28] examined subjects’
scan paths as they carried out search tasks. They found that on
average subjects scanned just 3.2 distinct search results for each
query. Using cursor movements, Huang, White, and Dumais [20]
found that people re-queried after inspecting the top four results.
Another experimental study motivated by Search Economy Theory
found that search depth was affected by query cost [2]. Subjects
that used an interface, which required more time to enter a query,
entered significantly fewer queries and went to greater depths in the
search results list than subjects who used a standard search

558

2.5 Need for Cognition (NFC)

RQ3: What is the relationship between NFC and search
behaviors?

Considerable research related to NFC has been conducted in the
fields of social psychology, personality psychology, behavioral
medicine, education, media studies, marketing and law. In general,
this research has found that high NFC is associated with higher
motivation to seek information, increased information processing
effort, and an increased ability to assess message quality. Bailey [3]
found in a study during which managers were asked to evaluate job
candidates, that high NFC managers evaluated candidates’
information more thoroughly than low NFC managers. In another
study where students were given editorials to evaluate, high NFC
students performed better at discriminating between strong and
weak arguments than low NFC students [8]. This evidence suggests
NFC may also explain variations in the amount of information
searched for and the strategies people use when conducting
information search. To date, the only study that has investigated the
role of NFC in IR was Scholer, et al. [37] who investigated if this
characteristic mediated the extent to which a list of documents, with
varying densities of relevant and non-relevant documents, impacted
people’s relevance judgments of those documents. While the
researchers did not find that NFC mediated this relationship, their
study participants did not differ greatly with respect to NFC, so lack
of variance on this measure might have prevented them from
observing an impact.

Individuals with high NFC have been found to exert more effort
during information processing. This has two possible implications
for information search. First, people with high NFC may examine
more information for a given query. Since high NFC searchers
enjoy the thinking process, their higher motivation to process
information may allow them to be more resilient to non-relevant
search results, thus lowering their motivation to reformulate.
Second, it is also likely that people with high NFC may exert more
effort on query reformulation. Since people with high NFC enjoy
thinking and query reformulation is a cognitive task, effort may
manifest in more frequent query reformulations rather than
prolonged engagement with search results. Support for the latter
hypothesis also comes from research that has demonstrated that
high NFC people make more accurate judgments about message
quality [8]. If high NFC people are more capable of discriminating
high quality from low quality content, they may reformulate as soon
as they encounter a bad document in search for higher quality
information.

4. METHOD
A laboratory experiment was conducted with three independent
variables: information scent level (ISL), information scent pattern
(ISP) and need for cognition (NFC). The first two variables were
within-subject variables, while the last was a between-subjects
variable. Information scent level (ISL) was defined as the number
of relevant documents on the first SERP and was operationalized
with three levels: high, medium and low (Table 1). In the high
condition, five relevant documents appeared on the first SERP, in
the medium, three relevant documents and in the low, one relevant
document. To control for the influence of result positioning,
relevant results were always placed consecutively starting from the
first result and also represented the best possible orderings for each
level. Information scent pattern (ISP) was defined as the
distribution of relevant documents on the first SERP and was
operationalized with three levels: persistent, disrupted and bursting,
each of which differed according to the distribution of four relevant
search results on the first SERP (Table 1). The persistent pattern
initially has a high scent, with relevant documents in the first two
positions, followed by two more relevant documents at a consistent
interval. The disrupted pattern starts with a strong scent, which
quickly extinguishes. This represents the best possible ordering for
four relevant documents. The bursting pattern represents a case
where the scent is not initially present, but then appears strong and
steady in the middle of the list before extinguishing.

3. RESEARCH QUESTIONS
This study is concerned with using information scent and need for
cognition to explain the search behavior of people conducting
open-ended search tasks, or tasks that require several documents to
complete, and addresses the following three research questions:
RQ1: What is the relationship between the information scent
level of the first SERP and search behaviors?
Searchers often have to issue several queries before they obtain a
sufficient amount of information for open-ended search tasks. It is
proposed that the first SERP can be viewed as a surrogate for the
entire set of results returned in response to a query. Just as searchers
can be made aware of the potential value of a single search result
by the information scent of the snippet [25][29] and the potential
usefulness of an entire website based on its homepage [9], arguably
they may also attempt to predict the potential value of the entire set
of results retrieved for a query based on the quality of the initial
SERP. Based on the same analogy, the information scent of the first
SERP can possibly be used to predict how long a searcher will
evaluate a set of search results for a single query. If the number of
relevant results is higher on the first page, this might increase the
interactions with the result set compared to when the first SERP has
fewer relevant results.

Table 1. Information Scent Level and Information Scent
Pattern conditions (R=Relevant; NR=Non-Relevant)

RQ2: What is the relationship between the information scent
pattern of the first SERP and search behaviors?

Level
Pattern
Rank Low Medium High Persistent Disrupted Bursting
1
NR
R
R
R
R
R
2
NR
NR
R
R
R
R
3
NR
NR
NR
R
R
R
4
NR
NR
NR
R
R
R
5
NR
NR
NR
R
R
R
6
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
R
7
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
R
8
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
R
9
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
10 NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR

The finding that when information scent declined on a web page,
searchers tended to leave the website [9] also suggests that the
distribution of relevant results might impact how long a searcher
interacts with a set of results. It is proposed that when relevant
search results are evenly distributed across the first SERP, a certain
degree of information scent is maintained throughout the first
SERP. This in turn, might induce a searcher to interact with the
result set to a greater extent. In contrast, when relevant results are
concentrated in batches on the first SERP, searchers might be more
likely to believe they have seen all the relevant results.

559

During the experiment, a total of six search tasks were assigned to
each participant to complete. The study tasks were rotated
according to a Latin Square design. In three of the six tasks, ISL
was manipulated while in the other three tasks ISP was
manipulated. Participants were made to believe they were using an
experimental search engine and were asked to enter self-generated
queries to complete the tasks. However, no matter what queries
they issued for their first three query submissions for a given task,
they received preselected search results that reflected various ISL
and ISP conditions. The word “search result set” is used to describe
the entire preselected search results, which contained a total of ten
search result pages (100 results). The manipulation is summarized
in Figure 1. From left to right three preselected search results sets
were presented to participants for each query they submitted. In
each search result set, the very first SERP was manipulated to
reflect a specific experimental condition. In the three tasks where
ISL was manipulated, the first three SERPs displayed high,
medium and low ISL conditions. In the other three tasks where ISP
was manipulated, the three first SERPs displayed persistent,
disrupted and bursting ISP conditions. The orders of these
conditions were rotated for each task, so that each participant
experienced each condition on the first SERP for one task. Results
presented at the 11th to 100th positions for the first three sets of
results were also preselected. Only the twelfth, fifteenth and
eighteenth results on the second SERPs were relevant; we did not
include more relevant documents on this page because we were
interested in focusing on participants’ transitions from the first
SERP. However, we included some relevant documents because we
did not want participants who went to these subsequent pages to
learn from their interactions that paginating to the second page
always ended up futile. They were not required to view all SERPs
or enter any pre-specified number of queries. If a participant
submitted more than three queries, the Bing search API 1 was used
to fetch results.

also allowed us to use some of the documents retrieved by previous
participants in this study. The tasks were open-ended search tasks
that presented a motivation for seeking the information and several
questions of interest. All tasks took this basic form and asked
participants to gather and analyze information, and make a
decision. An example task can be seen in Figure 2; all tasks are
available online2. Participants were told to spend as much as they
wanted on each task, until they collected a set of pages that in they
felt satisfied the information requirement of the task. Participants
were not required to produce any answers, but were told to save
pages that helped them address the task.
Special care was taken to ensure that participants would experience
the preselected search results in accordance to the manipulated
information scent levels and patterns. Relevant search results were
selected from the clicked webpages gathered by participants in the
previous project. Each clicked page was reviewed by one of the
study authors and two other assessors. Only webpages that were
judged by all three assessors as relevant were used. Non-relevant
search results were identified by submitting queries composed of a
keyword from the task description and some terms unrelated to the
task to a popular search engine. For example, non-relevant search
results for one task which was about methods of tattoo removal
were gathered by submitting the queries tattoo designs and tattoo
mistakes. It was also important to ensure that the result snippets
clearly reflected whether a landing page was relevant or not so that
subjects would experience the intended information scents. Nonrelevant search results and snippets were also evaluated by two
assessors. Eight pilot studies were conducted to ensure that all the
manipulations worked and did not cause suspicion.

4.2 Search Interface
The search interface is shown in Figure 2. At the start of the task,
the task description was shown at the top along with a query box.
After participants submitted their initial queries, a page of ten
results was displayed. When a participant clicked on a search result,
the landing page was presented in a separate tab and participants
were asked whether they wanted to save the page (Figure 3). Once
participants submitted a response, the tab automatically closed and
participants were taken back to the SERP. If participants attempted
to close the tab without answering the question, a warning message
appeared. Participants clicked “Done” in the upper right corner of
the search page when they finished the task. Before starting the
study, participants were given a practice task.

Need for Cognition (NFC), the other independent variable, was
measured by the NFC scale [7]. The NFC scale contained 18 items
assessed with a 5-point scale (5=extremely characteristic of me;
1=extremely uncharacteristic of me). NFC scores for participants
were derived by averaging responses to these 18 items. Participants
completed this scale at the end of the study.

Figure 1. Search result evaluation flow

4.1 Tasks & Documents

Figure 2. Search Interface

We reused and adapted a set of tasks that had been used in a
previous project so that we had more evidence about the range and
types of queries people might submit [43]. We did not want to
assign search tasks where people would enter a lot of different
queries as we wanted to ensure that our preselected results would
be relevant. The query logs from the previous study showed that
most subjects submitted keywords from task descriptions and thus
we believed potential queries were within predictable ranges. This
1

Figure 3. Landing Page Interface

2

http://datamarket.azure.com/dataset/bing/search

560

http://wanchinw.web.unc.edu/sigir-supplementary-page/

was good. Some commented there were many non-relevant results
on the first page, but explained this by the popularity of certain
webpages or advertisements or attributed this to their own
ambiguous queries. No participant indicated they suspected
manipulation.

4.3 Search Behaviors
The dependent measures consisted of search behaviors, which were
recorded in a search log:
 QueryAction: a categorical measure of the outcome after a
query submission. The measure has three values: query
reformulation on the first SERP, paginating to the second SERP
or stopping a task on the first SERP.
 Abandonment: not clicking on a SERP after a query
submission.
 NumPagination: frequency of pagination within a search result
set.
 NumQuery: number of query submissions during a task.
 Time: amount of time spent examining a search result set.
 DeepestRankClick: deepest rank of a clicked result.
 DeepestRankHover: deepest rank where a mouse hover was
observed.
 NumExamined: number of documents examined for each
search result set.
 NumPred, NumRele and NumNonRele: A predictive
judgment of relevance is made when a searcher views only a
search result snippet, while an evaluative judgment of relevance
is made after a searcher examines the content [35]. NumPred was
the number of documents participants clicked on but decided not
to save; NumRele was the number of documents that were
clicked and saved; NumNonRele refers to the number of
documents that were ranked before DeepestRankClick but not
clicked.

5. RESULTS
5.1 Overview
The forty-seven participants completed a total of 282 tasks.
Participants were able to enter as many queries as desired. Figure 4
shows the distribution of the number of queries submitted per task.
In about 60% of the tasks, participants submitted 1-3 queries.
Figure 4. Query submission frequency per task

Percentage of Tasks

Descriptive statistics for continuous search behavior measures
aggregated at the task level can be seen in Table 2. “n” next to the
mode represents the frequency of tasks for the most common
27%
18%
15%

13%

11%

11%
5%

1

2
3
4
5
6
7 to 19
Number of Query Submissions
action. On average, participants issued 3.47 queries per task, and
for 76 tasks, participants issued only one query. Forty-six out of the
76 tasks were ISP tasks (four relevant results were presented on the
first SERPs), and in another 19 tasks participants encountered a
high ISL (five relevant results on the first SERPs); moreover, 32
out of the 76 tasks involved at least one pagination. This suggests
that encountering more relevant documents during a query
submission probably resulted in satisfaction without reformulation
even when the assigned tasks were open-ended tasks. Participants
also paginated an average of 1.47 times per task; however, in more
than half of the tasks they never paginated, and as many as twelve
participants never paginated during the entire experiment. Tasks
lasted 6.6 minutes on average with a large range: the minimum time
was 76 seconds and the maximum, 19 minutes. Participants saved
4.82 results per task.

Participants’ searches were also captured with Morae and at the end
of the study they were interviewed using stimulated recall with
video recordings of three of their searches.

4.4 Participants
Participants were recruited by sending an email to the staff mailing
list at our university. Forty-eight people participated, but only data
from 47 participants are included because of a logging failure.
Participants’ average age was 38.29 (range: 19-65). Their job titles
included web developer, HR specialist, financial aid counselor,
administrative assistant, librarian, lab manager, instructor, research
assistant, play writer, fire department technician, and sales
manager. Participants scored an average of 7.81 (SD=1.34) on a 10point search self-efficacy scale, showing a medium to high level of
confidence in web search skills. Participants were paid $20 cash for
their participation.

With respect to NFC, our participants scored an average of 3.75 on
a five-point scale (SD=0.55) and the distribution of NFC scores was
normal. We correlated NFC with search behavior measures
aggregated at the task level to examine whether there were any
relationships and found that participants with higher NFC
paginated less than those with lower NFC (r= -.33, p=.023, N=47).

4.5 Manipulation Check
During each search task, participants were shown preselected
search result sets for their first three queries. Among the documents
participants clicked on for their first three queries, 98.22% were
judged relevant by the assessors and among those they saved,
99.22% were judged relevant by the assessors, which shows the
manipulation of document relevance was successful. To examine
whether our pre-selected search results caused any suspicion, we
asked participants at the end of the experiment to comment on the
quality of the search results. Most participants reported the quality

During the three search tasks where ISL was manipulated,
participants were exposed to 105 low, 109 medium, and 126 high
result manipulations, while in the other three tasks where ISP was
manipulated participants were exposed to 98 persistent, 101
disrupted, 104 bursting result manipulations. The outcomes of

Table 2. Search behaviors at the task level
Time
NumQuery NumPagination NumExamined DeepestRankClick DeepestRankHover NumPred NumRele NumNonRele
(sec)
Mean 332
3.47
1.47
6.7
17.28
33.22
1.76
4.82
10.59
Median 291
3
0
6
14
19
1
4
8
Mode -1 (n=76)
0 (n=167)
4 (n=56)
12 (n=17)
19 (n=24)
0 (n=98) 4 (n=71) 0, 1, 5 (n=66)
SD
427
2.67
2.97
3.96
14.36
35.15
2.28
2.70
11.79

561

Reformulation

To examine whether the results observed from the descriptive
statistics were significant, Generalized Estimating Equations
(GEE) [41] was applied to model the effect of ISL, ISP and NFC
on search behaviors. GEE allowed us to run linear regression
analysis (for continuous measures) and logistic regression analysis
(for categorical measures) for repeated measurements. For each
search behavior measure, we entered ISL, NFC and their interaction
term in one model, and ISP, NFC and their interaction term in
another model. Results of GEE are reported in Tables 5 and 6 and
are discussed in detail in the subsequent sections according to
research question.

Stopping

54%
21%
25%

P

D

19%
14%

53%
23%
23%

50%
22%
28%
H

Table 3. Search behavior measures (M, SD) by ISL (The
highest mean for each measure is bolded to facilitate
comparisons)
Measures
Low
Medium
High
61.85
101.86
128.05
Time
(63.12)
(75.35)
(79.28)
NumPagination
.48 (1.27)
.47 (1.38)
.61 (1.58)
NumExamined
.78 (0.81)
2.02 (1.33) 2.82 (1.37)
DeepestRankClick 2.71 (5.45) 4.10 (4.70) 6.49 (10.03)
DeepestRankHover 9.23 (14.57) 9.85 (16.24) 12.02 (18.51)
NumPred
.21 (.47)
.48 (.70)
.65 (.78)
NumRele
.57 (.55)
1.47 (1.14) 2.13 (1.28)
NumNonRele
1.94 (4.87) 2.11 (4.09) 3.67 (9.22)
Table 4. Search behavior measures (M, SD) by ISP (The
highest mean for each measure is bolded to facilitate
comparisons)
Measure
Persistent
Disrupted
Bursting
112.54
97.48
121.17
Time
(76.39)
(77.16)
(102.11)
NumPagination
.47 (1.21)
.48 (1.45)
.53 (1.45)
NumExamined
2.35 (1.69) 2.31 (1.62) 1.95 (1.59)
DeepestRankClick 6.33 (5.71) 4.82 (5.21) 5.72 (4.34)
DeepestRankHover 10.74 (13.21) 10.05 (15.86) 11.56 (16.79)
NumPred
.37 (.58)
.40 (.69)
.40 (.62)
NumRele
1.91
(1.58)
1.49
(1.39)
1.94 (1.61)
NumNonRele
3.98 (4.37) 2.51 (4.33) 3.77 (3.26)

1%

17%
10%

21%

Pagination

non-relevant snippets. However, there are no obvious consistent
differences among ISP condition (Table 4).

66%

72%

78%

participants’ query submissions are presented in Figure 5. From
low to high ISL, reformulations decreased and stoppings increased.
When comparing ISP, bursting appeared to lead to the highest
percentage of reformulations and the lowest percentage of
stoppings. The distribution of behaviors for persistent and disrupted
were similar. Pagination remained relatively constant across all ISL
and ISP conditions.

L

M

B

ISL
ISP
Figure 5. Reformulation, pagination and stopping by
experimental condition (L=low; M=medium; H=high;
P=persistent; D=disrupted; B=bursting).
We also examined query abandonment to understand how ISL and
ISP affected participants’ reactions to result snippets. The bars in
Figure 6 represent the abandonment rate given each condition.
When participants were presented with a SERP with low ISL, they
chose to leave without examining any document around 42% of the
time, while the abandonment rate for high ISL was only 1.6%. The
differences among ISP conditions were not as dramatic but
abandonment for the bursting condition happened 10% more than
in the persistent condition, which is interesting since these
condition had the exact same number of relevant documents. Also
interestingly, this abandonment rate was higher than that of
medium ISP, which had one less relevant result.

Percentage of
Abandonment

41.9%

5.2 RQ1: ISL and Search Behaviors

20.2%
12.8%

10.2%

11.9%

P

D

The first research question of this study is: what is the relationship
between ISL and search behavior? The results from Table 5
indicate that ISL significantly influenced Time, QueryAction,
Abandonment,
NumExamined,
NumPred,
NumRele,
NumNonRele and DeepestRankClick, Follow-up contrasts were
conducted to compare whether the differences between any two
conditions were significant. The results show that high ISL led to
the greatest NumExamined, DeepestRankClick, NumPred, and
NumRele, followed by medium, and low (all contrasts: p <.05);
high ISL led to more NumNonRele than low ISL (p <.05), but no
significant difference was found between high and medium for
NumNonRele. Participants abandoned their queries more often
when the ISL was low, followed by medium, and high (all
contrasts: p<.01). There were interaction effects between ISL and
NFC on Time and QueryAction; all interaction effects are
discussed in Section 5.5.

1.6%
L

M

H

B

ISL
ISP
Figure 6. Abandonment by experimental condition (L=low;
M=medium; H=high; P=persistent; D=disrupted;
B=bursting).
Performance on each continuous search behavior measure given
each ISL and ISP condition is reported in Tables 3 and 4. From
Table 3 one can see as ISL increased from low to high, participants
consistently spent more time searching in the search result set,
examined more results, went to greater depths both in terms of
clicks and mouse hovers, saved more documents, clicked but
decided not to save more documents, and scanned through more

In most tasks, participants did not paginate to the second page, so
we examined how ISL influenced interactions on the first SERPs

562

by only including cases where participants did not paginate. We
found one additional significant effect of ISL: DeepestRankHover
(X2=20.08, p<.0001) All other measures remained statistically
significant. When the first SERP had high ISL (M=4.68, SD=.20)
participants hovered to lower ranks than medium (M=4.30,
SD=.20) and low (M=3.39, SD=.30) (L<M, L<H; p<.01).

Next, we excluded the queries that led to paginations and examined
the search behavior measures within the range of the first page. It
was found that participants stopped clicking at higher ranks in the
disrupted condition (X2=79.30, p<.01). While in both persistent and
bursting conditions DeepestRankClick were similar (4.51 and 4.61,
respectively), when the disrupted condition was encountered,
participants did not click beyond rank 2.76. There were also
significant effects of ISP on DeepestRankHover (P, B>D, p<.01),
and NumNonRele (P, B>D, p<.05).

Table 5. Results for ISL conditions (Wald X2, significance)
Measures
ISL
NFC
Interaction
Time
62.94****
9.15**
6.01*
NumPagination
0.74
3.99*
2.33
QueryAction
17.69**
0.20
13.17*
Abandonment
46.42****
43.56
0.44
NumExamined
219.26****
0.45
0.12
NumPred
33.90****
0.00
0.61
NumRele
110.85****
0.31
0.24
NumNonRele
6.47*
1.41
0.96
DeepestRankClick
30.33****
1.28
0.89
DeepestRankHover
2.02
4.78*
2.77
Note. *p<.05, **p<.01, ***p<.001, ****p<.0001

5.4 RQ3: NFC and Search Behaviors
The last research question examines the relationship between NFC
and search behaviors. The effects of NFC according to ISL and ISP
are reported in Tables 5 and 6. There was a main effect of NFC on
Time, NumPagination, and DeepestRankHover in ISL conditions
but not in ISP conditions. People with higher NFC scores paginated
less and stopped hovering at higher ranks. The effect of NFC on
time was conditioned on ISL and is discussed in the next section.

5.5 Interaction Effects
An interaction effect between ISL and NFC was found for time
(X2=6.01, p=.05). The relationships are plotted in Figure 7 at
NFC=10th, 50th and 90th percentile for better understanding. While
overall ISL was related positively to time and NFC was related
negatively to time, the effect of ISL on time was moderated by NFC
to a greater extent when ISL was high. As NFC increased from the
10th percentile to the 90th, the difference between ISL became less
obvious. In other words, while all participants searched longer
when there were more relevant documents, low NFC participants
increased their search time more across ISL.

5.3 RQ2: ISP and Search Behaviors
The second research question addresses the relationship between
ISP and search behaviors. Results in Table 6 show ISP had a
significant effect on NumRele and NumNonRele. Follow-up
contrasts indicate NumRele was significantly greater in the
persistent and disrupted conditions than in bursting (p<.05), but no
difference was found between persistent and disrupted.
NumNonRele was significantly higher in persistent and bursting
than in disrupted (p<.05), but no significant difference was found
between persistent and bursting. Results also revealed that
abandonment rates for persistent and disrupted were significantly
lower than bursting (p<.05).

200

100

Probability

Reformulation

50

TIME (SEC)

150

Table 6. Results for ISP conditions (Wald X2, significance)
Measure
ISP
NFC
Interaction
Time
3.80
0.50
0.59
NumPagination
0.16
2.24
1.51
QueryAction
2.74
1.81
3.16
Abandonment
6.33*
0.58
3.34
NumExamined
5.52
0.42
1.50
NumPred
0.33
0.50
2.43
NumRele
8.57*
0.83
2.57
NumNonRele
9.98**
0.85
2.18
DeepestRankClick
5.07
0.80
2.54
DeepestRankHover
1.60
2.54
1.78
Note. *p<.05, **p<.01

1

Low

67

Another interaction effect between ISL and NFC was found in
QueryAction (X2=17.69, p<.01), which means the relationship
between NFC and the predicted probability for each QueryAction
outcome depended on ISL, and the nature of the effect of ISL varied
with the outcomes. The predicted probabilities for reformulation,
pagination and stopping are plotted in Figure 8. The relationship

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

Medium

NFC

4.5

5

0.8
0.6

High

0
4

Stopping

1
Low

0.4

3.5

85

50th
90th
NFC (PERCENTILE)
Figure 7. Interaction effect between ISL and NFC on Time

0.6

3

62.5

10th

0.6

2.5

102

0

0.8

2

104

56

0.8

0

High

129

119

Pagination

1

Medium

149

0
2

2.5

3

3.5

NFC

4

4.5

5

2

2.5

3

3.5

NFC

4

4.5

Figure 8. (Left to right) Predicted probability of reformulation, pagination, and stopping by NFC and ISL

563

5

between NFC and the probability of reformulation was positive for
medium ISL, but negative for low and high ISL, indicating that
higher NFC was related to a higher probability of reformulation for
medium ISL but lower probabilities for low and high ISL. The
slope is also the steepest for medium, which means the effect of
NFC was the strongest for medium ISL. The relationship between
NFC and pagination was negative and strong for medium but
positive and weak for low and high ISL. Lastly, the relationship
between NFC and stopping was weak and negative for medium, but
weak and positive for low and high.

image search and literature search. In people search, participants
commented they knew little about a person and many people could
share the same names, so they did not mind filtering through search
results. In product search, because they did not want to miss great
deals, participants were willing to go deeper just in case.
Participants said they paginated in image search because processing
images was perceived less effortful than text. And in literature
search some participants commented they often used Google
Scholar or library databases, which they believed were more
trustworthy, and therefore they were comfortable going through
multiple pages, assuming results deeper were also credible.

5.6 Participant Explanations of Behaviors

5.6.3 Search Stopping

After participants finished their searches, they were shown videorecordings of three of their searches and asked to provide
explanations whenever they reformulated, paginated or stopped.

The strategies participants used to decide when to stop included
fulfilling the task requirements, receiving both positive and
negative perspectives, finding information from several credible
sources, feeling they knew enough to have a discussion with the
hypothetical family member in the task description, feeling they
had spent enough time searching, and not feeling interested in the
topic. A couple of participants used a pre-determined number of
relevant documents as a heuristic for when to stop searching; these
pre-determined values were 3 or 4 for some, and 5 or 6 for others.
These comments corresponded to [31] where the researchers
proposed searchers use a pre-determined threshold to decide when
to stop. Few participants said they based their stopping decisions
on “intuitions” or “feelings,” as many previous studies have
reported [15][34][44].

5.6.1 Reformulation
Participants who reformulated on the first SERP often did so
because the results suggested to them they needed to be more
specific or they were not on the right track. For example, one
participant pointed to the screen and commented “From here down,
there is nothing to do with what I am looking for, something is
telling me I need to re-strategize.” This suggests that reformulations
could result from lack of information scent. When prompted why
they did not paginate, some people said they were so used to
searching with Google that they believed relevant results should be
on the first page, which probably explains why only 21% queries
in our study led to pagination; even when participants knew
relevant pages could occur after the first SERP, they found “it is
easier to do a new search.” Others said they just “did not bother to
go through more results;” instead they wanted to find the right
search word to bring good results on top. One participant
acknowledged that it was the knowledge that “this isn’t your last
chance, right? I can always come back to this search configuration
if I want to….it is a desire, a sense that a new term might get me
better results” encouraged him to re-query instead of going to the
second page. Others issued another query because they had
acquired enough information about one aspect of the topic, and
decided to shift focus.

6. DISCUSSION
The current study examined the extent to which the theories of
Information Scent and Need for Cognition could be used to explain
three search behaviors: reformulation, search depth and stopping.
The findings suggest that ISL was a stronger predictor than ISP.
Not only did ISL predict search depth on the first SERP, together
with NFC, they were able to explain the patterns of variations in the
predicted probabilities of reformulation, pagination and stopping.
From Figure 8 we can see the slopes of medium ISL were steeper
than the slopes of low and high when predicting the probabilities of
reformulation and pagination, which means that NFC had a more
profound effect when the SERP contained a mid-level amount of
relevant result pages. The consistently higher reformulation
probabilities in low ISL than high ISL regardless of NFC probably
suggests that five relevant documents were adequate while one
relevant document was not enough. Yet when there were three
relevant documents, participants with higher and lower NFC
possibly had different interpretations of whether this was enough.
For participants with high NFC, evaluating three relevant results
probably reached their higher bound of “the feeling of enough” for
a given query submission, therefore the probability of
reformulation increased and the probability of pagination
decreased. On the other hand, for participants with low NFC,
examining three relevant documents probably only reached their
lower bound of “the feeling of enough”, which explained why there
was a lower probability of reformulation and a higher probability
of pagination.

5.6.2 Paginations
Participants often attributed paginations to the observation that the
first page looked good but they still did not have enough
information. Others said they continued because they were curious
about what was on the second page, they did not know what other
terms to use, or they felt confident about their search terms. For
participants who mentioned the first page looked good, they often
based quality judgments on “the number of relevant results” or “the
aggregate quality” observed on the first page; hardly did they
discuss the effect of ranking on pagination. When participants
paginated, they were asked why they did not choose to submit a
new search instead. Some participants believed going to the second
page was “just a click, why not?” Compared with participants who
preferred to invest cognitive effort in query formulations, this
behavior appeared in a sharp contrast about how participants
conceptualize search effort. Others expressed that learning from
experience they knew sometimes good results were not on the first
page because “not many people searched for them.” Still others said
they almost always gave the second and even the third page a
chance out of habit, exemplifying a case where personality may
come into play.

Even though ISP effects were not obvious in this study, at least the
alternative rankings manipulated in this study, persistent and
bursting ISP, did not perform worse than disrupted ISP, the ranking
which was modeled after today’s search engine result ranking.
Greater DeepestRankClick and DeepestRankHover on the first
SERP in persistent and bursting suggested that the similar
performances were due to extra search effort on the first SERP.
This finding repeated previous findings that searchers work harder
to compensate for less than optimal result rankings [38]. This

At the end of the interview, participants were encouraged to recall
in their real life when they actually paginated to gather information.
The most commonly described searches where participants
paginated were when they conducted people search, product search,

564

finding implies that during the testing of different search rankings
that people are tolerant of some non-relevant results so long as they
are positioned at specific ranks. A possible implication in the
context of aggregated search is that when search engines are not
confident about which vertical results (e.g., image or news) to
present, interleaving vertical results of questionable relevance with
relevant text results may cause users to stay on the SERP. Given an
ambiguous query (e.g., mac), interleaving Web results and vertical
results of different senses (e.g., Mac the computer and MAC the
makeup) might engage users and allow for search engines to gather
more user interaction information.

situations where searchers have higher motivation to paginate than
to reformulate, slightly different interventions can be applied.

7. CONCLUSIONS
In this work we investigated the extent to which two theories,
Information Scent and Need for Cognition, explained search
behaviors. The findings showed that the level of information scent
on the first SERP and a searcher’s need for cognition can be used
to explain search behaviors such as reformulations, search depth
and stopping. Although this study sought to evaluate the usefulness
of two theories for explaining search behavior, clearly there is more
work to be done if we are to establish more explanatory models of
search behavior to complement the numerous descriptive and
predictive models that currently exist.

ISL and ISP impact on query abandonment demonstrates the
usefulness of information scent on information source selection.
When the first SERP showed only one relevant result, participants
probably assumed the results were not promising just by the
snippets and abandoned the results set; our participants’ comments
that a low number of relevant pages indicated they were “not on the
right track” supported this explanation. When participants were
presented with the bursting ISP, it was possible participants did not
realize there were four relevant documents since they did not scan
deep enough. Persistent ISP could have maintained participants’
attention because the interleaving of relevant and non-relevant
results prompted them to reflect on their queries. It might also be
the case that as long as the first two results were relevant, the
information scent provided by the SERP was enough to engage
participants.

8. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We thank Drs. Jaime Arguello, Nicholas Belkin, Robert Capra and
Barbara Wildemuth for their input about research design, and Dr.
Chris Wiesen for his assistance with statistical analysis.

9. REFERENCES
[1] Anick, P. (2003). Using terminological feedback for Web
search refinement - A log-based Study. In Proceedings of
SIGIR’03, 88–95.
[2] Azzopardi, L., Kelly, D., & Brennan, K. (2013). How query
cost affects search behavior. In Proceedings of SIGIR’13,
23–32.

The high reformulation rate observed in the current study suggests
a reconsideration of the use of search effectiveness measures.
While researchers often decide an arbitrary rank at which users may
reach based on hypothetical user models and task models, setting a
rank beyond 10 seems unrealistic in most cases, even for
information-gathering tasks. Our results show that even in openended tasks where participants needed more than one result (or
snippet) to solve an information problem, participants tended to
reformulate to gather more information than paginate. Even in high
ISL where there were five relevant results at the optimal ranking,
the reformulation rate was still as high as 50%. If most results
beyond the 10th rank are never examined by people when using
search engines, evaluating algorithms based on an inclusion of
results beyond the 10th rank probably does not reflect users’
perception of system performance at least for the types of tasks
typically evaluated in experimental IR. Note, however, that our
participants did identify several scenarios (e.g., database search)
and tasks (e.g., people search) where they typically paginated.

[3] Bailey, J. (1997). Need for cognition and response mode in
the active construction of an information domain. Journal of
Economic Psychology, 18(1), 69–85.
[4] Borlund, P. (2003). The IIR evaluation model: a framework
for evaluation of interactive information retrieval systems.
Information Research, 8(3), 152.
[5] Browne, G., & Pitts, M. (2004). Stopping rule use during
information search in design problems. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 95(2), 208–224.
[6] Cacioppo, J., Petty, R., Feinstein, J., & Jarvis, W. (1996).
Dispositional differences in cognitive motivation: The life
and times of individuals varying in need for cognition.
Psychological Review, 119(2), 197–253.
[7] Cacioppo, J., Petty, R., & Kao, C. (1984). The efficient
assessment of need for cognition. Journal of Personality
Assessment, 48, 306–307.
[8] Cacioppo, J., Petty, R., & Morris, K. (1983). Effects of need
for cognition on message evaluation, recall, and persuasion.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 45, 805–818.

Differences in NFC provided a strong explanation for search depth.
Results showed that participants with higher NFC paginated less
and had more shallow hovers. Our results also showed that lower
NFC participants went deeper in the search result. This implies that
search results that occupy the highest ranks play a more important
role in search result evaluation for high NFC searchers than for low
NFC searchers (results ranked lower were less likely to be viewed
by high NFC searchers). Thus, a different weighting scheme or
discounting factor in measures such as nDCG might be used based
on the searcher’s NFC. While higher NFC participants remained
relatively stable in terms of the time they spent on search result sets
regardless of ISL, participants with lower NFC showed greater
adaptability to the SERP environment and were more willing to go
deeper in the SERP. With respect to interface design, these results
suggest that instead of displaying ten search results per page,
displaying more results per page or automatically loading
subsequent pages as participants scroll, might encourage low NFC
searchers to consider more information before making decisions. In

[9] Card, S., Pirolli, P., Van Der Wege, M. M., Morrison, J. B.,
Reeder, R. W., Shraedley, P. K., & Boshart, J. (2001).
Information scent as a driver of Web behavior graphs: results
of a protocol analysis method for Web usability. In
Proceedings of CHI, 498-505.
[10] Chi, E. H, Pirolli, P., Chen, K., & Pitkow, J. E. (2001). Using
information scent to model searcher needs and actions on the
web. In Proceeding of CHI, (CHI Letters), 3(1), 490–497.
[11] Chi, E. H, Pirolli, P., & Pitkow, J. (2000). The scent of a site:
A system for analyzing and predicting information scent,
usage, and usability of a Web site. In Proceeding of CHI,
161–168.
[12] Cooper, W. (1968). Expected search length: A single
measure of retrieval effectiveness based on the weak

565

ordering action of retrieval systems. American
Documentation, 19(1), 30–41.

[30] Mansourian, Y., & Ford, N. (2007). Search persistence and
failure on the web: a “bounded rationality” and “satisficing”
analysis. Journal of Documentation, 63(5), 680–701.

[13] Cooper, W. S. (1973). On selecting a measure of retrieval
effectiveness part II. JASIS, 24(6), 413–424.
[14] Cutrell, E., & Guan, Z. (2007). What are you looking for? An
eye-tracking study of information usage in web search. In
Proceeding of CHI, 407–416.

[31] Nickles, K. R., Curley, S. P., & Benson, P. G. (1995).
Judgment-based and reasoning-based stopping rules in
decision making under uncertainty. Working Paper, Wake
Forest University.

[15] Dostert, M., & Kelly, D. (2009). Searchers’ stopping
behaviors and estimates of recall. In Proceedings of SIGIR,
820–821.

[32] Nov, O., Arazy, O., López, C., & Brusilovsky, P. (2013).
Exploring personality-targeted UI design in online social
participation systems. In Proceedings of CHI, 361-370

[16] Diriye, A., White, R. W., Buscher, G., & Dumais, S. T.
(2012). Leaving so soon? Understanding and predicting Web
search abandonment rationales. In Proceedings of CIKM,
1025-1034.

[33] Pirolli, P., & Card, S. (1999). Information foraging.
Psychological Review, 106(4), 643–675.
[34] Prabha, C., Connaway, L. S., Olszewski, L., & Jenkins, L. R.
(2007). What is enough? Satisficing information needs.
Journal of Documentation, 63(1), 74–89.

[17] Ford, N., Miller, D., & Moss, N. (2001). The role of
individual differences in Internet searching: An empirical
study. JASIS&T, 52(12), 1049–1066.

[35] Rieh, S. (2002). Judgment of information quality and
cognitive authority in the Web. JASIS&T, 53(2), 145–161.

[18] Hassan, A., Shi, X., Craswell, N., & Ramsey, B. (2013).
Beyond clicks: Query reformulation as a predictor of search
satisfaction. In Proceedings of CIKM, 2019-2018.

[36] Rieh, S.Y. and Xie, H. (2006). Analysis of multiple query
reformulations on the web: the interactive information
retrieval context. IP&M, 42(3), 751-768.

[19] Huang, J., & Efthimiadis, E. N. (2009). Analyzing and
evaluating query reformulation strategies in web search logs.
In Proceeding of CIKM, 77-86.

[37] Scholer, F., Kelly, D., Wu, W. C., Lee, H. S., & Webber, W.
(2013). The effect of threshold priming and need for
cognition on relevance calibration and assessment. In
Proceedings of SIGIR, 623-632.

[20] Huang, J., White, R. W., & Dumais, S. (2011). No clicks, no
problem. In Proceeding of CHI, 1225–1234.

[38] Smith, C. L., Kantor, P. B., & Street, H. (2008). User
adaptation : Good results from poor systems. In Proceedings
SIGIR, 144–154.

[21] Jansen, B. J., Booth, D. L., & Spink, A. (2009). Patterns of
query reformulation during Web searching, JASIS&T, 60(7),
1358–1371.

[39] Spink, A., Jansen, B. J., & Ozmultu, H. C. (2000). Use of
query reformulation and relevance feedback by Excite users.
Internet Research, 10(4), 317–328.

[22] Jansen, B.J., & Spink, A. (2005). How are we searching the
World Wide Web? A comparison of nine search engine
transaction logs. IP&M, 42(1), 248–263.

[40] Toms, E., & Freund, L. (2009). Predicting stopping
behaviour: A preliminary analysis. In Proceedings of SIGIR,
750–751.

[23] Järvelin. K. & Kekäläinen, J. (2002). Cumulated gain-based
evaluation of IR techniques. ACM TOIS, 20(4), 422–446.
[24] Joachims, T., Granka, L., Pan, B., Hembrooke, H., & Gay, G.
(2005). Accurately interpreting clickthrough data as implicit
feedback. In Proceedings of SIGIR, 154–161.

[41] Vittinghoff, E. (2012). Regression Methods in Biostatistics:
Linear, Logistic, Survival, and Repeated Measures Models.
Boston: Springer.

[25] Kammerer, Y., Wollny, E., Gerjets, P., & Scheiter, K.
(2009). How authority-related epistemological beliefs and
salience of source information influence the evaluation of
Web search results–An eye tracking study. In Proceedings of
the 31st Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society,
2158-2163.

[42] White, R. W., & Dumais, S. T. (2009). Characterizing and
predicting search engine switching behavior. In Proceedings
of CIKM, 87-96.

[26] Kantor, P. B. (1987). A model for the stopping behavior of
searchers of online systems. JASIS, 38(1), 211–214.

[43] Wu, W.C., Kelly, D., Edwards, A. & Arguello, J. Grannies,
tanning beds, tattoos and NASCAR: Evaluation of search
tasks with varying levels of cognitive complexity. Poster
presented in the 4th Information Interaction in Context
Symposium (IIiX’2012).

[27] Kraft, D., & Lee, T. (1979). Stopping rules and their effect
on expected search length. Information Processing and
Management, 15(1), 47–58.

[44] Zach, L. (2005). When is “enough” enough? Modeling the
information-seeking and stopping behavior of senior arts
administrators. JASIS&T, 56(1), 23–35.

[28] Lorigo, L., Haridasan, M., Brynjarsdóttir, H., Xia, L.,
Joachims, T., Gay, G., Granka, L., Pellacini, F., & Pan, B.
(2008). Eye tracking and online search: Lessons learned and
challenges ahead. JASIS&T, 59(7), 1041–1052.
[29] Loumakis, F., Stumpf, S., & Grayson, D. (2011). This image
smells good: Effects of image information scent in search
engine results pages. In Proceedings of CIKM, 11, 475–484.

566

