Time-Critical Search
∗

Nina Mishra Ryen W. White Samuel Ieong
Eric Horvitz
Microsoft Research
{ninam,ryenw,saieong,horvitz}@microsoft.com

ABSTRACT

ate assistance, and performing supportive procedures. Surfacing content that is relevant and understandable in timecritical settings could help people with taking timely action
in acute situations, where delays can be costly and even lifethreatening.
As we will show, people frequently turn to search engines for assistance with urgent medical matters. Search
engines might better help people to perform life-saving procedures while they are waiting for emergency medical services (EMS), especially in remote areas. Also, search engines could help people to understand the urgency of situations. EMS has been found to be underutilized because of
uncertainty about the relevance of symptoms [23], economic
disadvantage [50], and reliance on self-treatment [9]. As an
example, in the case of severe chest pain, only 50% of people
engage EMS [10]. By some reports, mortality from heart attacks can be decreased by 25% if therapy is initiated within
one hour of the onset of acute symptoms [9]. Offering solutions to such challenges could raise the likelihood of valuable
actions being rendered in advance of the arrival of EMS [38].
Time criticality has been studied outside of IR, and researchers have examined time–utility tradeoffs in settings
such as trauma care [28], emergency medicine [27, 35], communications [26] and aerospace [25]. Research on various
temporal aspects of IR has focused on longitudinal analyses of information needs [48, 11], including predicting future
events [45], ranking [46], and query auto-completion [49].
Recent work in search evaluation has focused on the inclusion of information gained over time in determining retrieval
system performance [31, 51]. However, to our knowledge
none of this research has explicitly considered the urgency
of situations in the process search and retrieval.
To our knowledge, we provide the first detailed study
of time-critical information needs and urgency in search.
We focus on the retrieval of time-critical health information needs because Web search is often used to search for
health information [20] and a portion of health searches are
urgent in nature, performed to address concerns and challenges arising in real time. We employ both a survey and a
large-scale analysis of mobile search behavior to understand
the nature of such urgent medical needs in retrieval settings,
characterize their occurrence, and develop models to predict
urgent needs given a query.
Before continuing, we present an example of a time-critical
health search situation drawn from the logs of the Microsoft
Bing search engine, used in our study (Figure 1). In the
example, the searcher is observed issuing queries about diagnosing a potential stroke. A subsequent search for an

We study time-critical search, where users have urgent information needs in the context of an acute problem. As examples, users may need to know how to stem a severe bleed,
help a baby who is choking on a foreign object, or respond
to an epileptic seizure. While time-critical situations and
actions have been studied in the realm of decision-support
systems, little has been done with time-critical search and retrieval, and little direct support is offered by search systems.
Critical challenges with time-critical search include accurately inferring when users have urgent needs and providing relevant information that can be understood and acted
upon quickly. We leverage surveys and search log data from
a large mobile search provider to (a) characterize the use
of search engines for time-critical situations, and (b) develop predictive models to accurately predict urgent information needs, given a query and a diverse set of features
spanning topical, temporal, behavioral, and geospatial attributes. The methods and findings highlight opportunities
for extending search and retrieval to consider the urgency of
queries.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Web search may be performed in the context of pressing, time-critical challenges where information is needed urgently. For example, acute medical concerns, such as fainting, seizures, bleeding, heart attack, broken bones, numbness, vertigo, and pain may lead to the urgent pursuit of
medical information in support of timely action. In timecritical situations, the value of retrieved information diminishes with delays in action informed by the information [27].
Urgency of action has largely been ignored in information
retrieval (IR). If search systems could estimate the urgency
of searchers’ information needs at query time, they could favor content that assists searchers in performing urgent tasks
such as making assessments of situations, engaging appropri∗Currently at Google.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR’14, July 6–11, 2014, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07 ...$15.00. Subject to Microsoft Research Open Access Policy. http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2609613.

747

8:08
8:10
8:17
8:39
8:42
8:44

heavy limbs fatigue
heavy limbs fatigue slurred speech
stroke in women
slurred speech heavy limbs
best emergency room in sugarland
best hospital in sugarland

and long-term searcher interests can also be useful for applications such as search personalization [7, 52].
Contextual signals such as location [5] and search task [40]
can be used to more completely model searcher’s situations
at query time. Research on mobile information seeking has
characterized usage patterns [34] or developed support for
mobile search [41]. However, these methods employ user
location in ranking (preferring proximal resources), rather
than using this information in a richer model of search intentions as we do in this research. Just-in-time information
retrieval agents [47] proactively retrieve information based
on user context and alert people to urgent information. We
focus on people seeking to satisfy urgent information needs
rather than on identifying valuable recommendations.
Studying longitudinal trends in online search behavior
within and between users can be useful for understanding
the in-world activities of searchers [48, 11], with applications
in health care [22, 57]. A recent study explored perceived
time pressure on search satisfaction, and search behavior in
controlled settings [14]. Time is also emerging as an important aspect of retrieval evaluation, with methods focused on
the extent of the information gained over the course of the
search session [31, 51].
Time-dependent actions and outcomes have been studied in the artificial intelligence (AI) community, including
efforts with representation and reasoning, and applications
in automated and human decision making. Studies in the
latter domain have focused on the development of methods
for the real-time control of the configuration and quantity
of information on displays [25], methods for triaging communications [26], and methods for representing and reasoning about time-dependent utilities of action, with applications that include providing decision support for emergency
medicine [27] and trauma care [28]. Beyond applications,
the work has explored key principles of time-critical decisions in light of computational and cognitive constraints,
e.g., [24]. Such careful exploration of the tradeoffs between
time and utility could enable search engines to consider degrees of urgency and information value. Human factors researchers have studied how people use information in such
time-sensitive work settings as emergency response [35]. Psychologists have also examined the influence of urgency on
human behavior [36] and work task performance [8].
Some limited support is available in search engines for particular high-stakes queries (e.g., searches for poison or suicide being linked to hotline telephone numbers [13]). Rather
than such sparse special-case linkages, we construct predictive models that estimate the urgency of queries via analysis
of query behavior and situational features.

Figure 1: Sample time-critical search session.

emergency room suggests that the searcher believes that the
situation is urgent.
Behavioral evidence such as that in Figure 1 has been used
to model search interests and intentions, especially when
including result click information [32, 1]. Using such evidence, combined with geographical, topical, and temporal
features, we develop classifiers to predict urgent information
needs. Estimating the degree of urgency associated with a
search request is a necessary first step for developing search
systems to support time-critical information seeking. Studies have shown that results returned by search systems for
urgent health scenarios are irrelevant, inaccurate, and do
not consider the influence of cognitive load on people facing emergency situations [43, 25]. Given an estimate of urgency, search systems could favor particular types of content
(e.g., instructional pages containing clear guidelines) or display instant answers comprising graphics or videos to guide
people in taking action quickly. Results that are most appropriate for urgent situations might not be ideal for more
relaxed settings. For example, the best material for reviewing cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) in preparation for
a course on advanced cardiac life support is quite different than the best content to display to frenetic users trying
to understand what to do when an elderly relative is suddenly unresponsive and no heartbeat and breathing can be
detected.
We shall next report on a survey performed by crowdworkers on recent handling of emergencies and the experience
with using search to support decisions during such emergencies. Then we describe the construction and validation of a
machine-learned classifier that can predict time criticality,
focusing on the definition of sets of predictive features and
the curation of the data set, employing an automated labeling procedure. Using nearly half a million sessions over six
months of mobile search activity, we build a classifier with
88% positive precision and positive recall.

2.

RELATED WORK

Areas of relevant related work include studies in (a) user
behavioral modeling, (b) time-aware information access, and
(c) models of time-criticality, including efforts in artificial
intelligence. We consider each of these areas in turn.
There has been significant research on analysis of search
behavior. Search log data has been used to study how people engage in search activity [55], predict users’ next online
actions, including the timing of next actions and the influence of timing on query content [37, 15], predict users’
future interests [17], and to improve the operation of search
engines [32, 1]. The influence of the search situation on information needs and activities has been examined in detail
in research on incorporation of notions of broader context in
search [29]. Focusing on individual users, modeling short-

3. MOTIVATION
A review of logs of searches performed in mobile settings
obtained from consenting users of the Microsoft Bing search
engine reveals a surprisingly large number of queries that
could be time critical. However, we cannot confirm urgency
in the absence of ground truth. To better understand urgency in search settings, we conducted an initial survey.
The goal was to estimate the frequency with which people turned to search engines when faced with time-critical
needs, the general circumstances of the situations, and to
understand how the degree of urgency influenced the use of
search engines.

748

Table 1: Distribution of recent urgent problems recalled and those who had used a search engine for assistance.
All Respondents
Fall (11%), Breathing Problems (10%), Abdominal Pain (8%), Chest Pain (7%), Allergies (7%),
Overdose (6%), Bleeding (6%), Other (6%), Back Pain (5%), Headache (4%), Psychiatric (4%), Eye
(4%), Unconscious (3%), Pregnancy (3%), Heart (3%), Diabetes (2%), Convulsions (2%), Choking
(2%), Cardiac (2%), Burns (2%), Animal (2%), Stroke (1%), Trauma (1%), Entrapment (1%),
Assault (1%)
Search Respon- Abdominal Pain (14%), Breathing Problems (10%), Other (10%), Allergies (9%), Chest Pain (7%),
dents
Fall (5%), Eye (5%), Overdose (5%), Heart Problems (4%), Headache (4%), Burns (4%), Bleeding
(4%), Back Pain (4%), Psychiatric (3%), Pregnancy (3%), Diabetes (3%), Cardiac (2%), Animal
(2%), Unconscious (1%), Convulsions (1%), Choking (1%), Trauma (1%), Heat Cold (1%), Electricity (1%)

The respondents’ descriptions of the use of search engines
shows a strong reliance on search. In some cases, online
search precedes a visit to the emergency department (ED)
to access information on what the problem might be and/or
what action should be taken. Here is an example typical of
the use of search as first responder: “My father had a lot
of pain in his left arm, and I looked up what it could be.
It turned out he was having a mild heart attack based on
my results we figured we should call 911.” One person said
“I googled what to do after someone struggled swallowing
food” when his friend was choking on dinner. He performed
the Heimlich Maneuver, and brought the friend to the hospital thereafter. In other situations, search engines are used
to guide searchers through the steps of the treatment process, e.g., “I witnessed someone having a heart attack. I had
to start cpr and had forgotten how. I quickly searched the
cpr technique.” In other cases, the searches follow a call to
911. For example, a user whose child was having convulsions
searched for [first time seizure in toddler] and [seizure first
aid] after calling 911. Another user “I searched head injuries
to see if there was anything else I could do while waiting for
the ambulance. I searched: head injury immediate treatment.”
Among those who used search engines, 83% were satisfied and 17% were not satisfied with the information they
had retrieved. Among the satisfied, some explained that
they could not blame the search engine since their symptoms
could mean the presence of many different conditions, e.g.,
there are many causes of abdominal pain. Those who were
not satisfied with search provided a variety of complaints.
The quality of displayed results were called into question
by some, e.g., a participant whose girlfriend was hit by a
car while walking mentioned, “I just couldn’t find anything
that I thought was reliable, well written information. I was
also probably in a slight state of shock, so simplified articles
would have been easier to digest.” Others complained about
advertisements,“The information that came back in bulk was
mostly junk sites looking to earn revenue from ads. No real
medical information. The couple of sites that did have okay
info, such as webmd, were so wishy washy in answers due to
litigation possibilities that it rendered their info worthless
too. I finally found some good peer reviewed info. Good
thing I know the medical jargon.” Others complained about
the quantity of search results “there was just to much stuff
that came up, in a situation when you are starting to panic
you get overwelmed really quick, especially when you think
you might be having a heart attack.” Other participants described being moved to anxiety by results that turned out
to be erroneous, e.g., “Less dire results. It kept telling me

For the survey, we employed Amazon’s Mechanical Turk
(AMT) to recruit a set of crowdworkers drawn from the
U.S. population. Two surveys were conducted. The first
was aimed at understanding general characteristics of how
users behave in an emergency. The second survey focused
specifically on the use of search in emergencies. The sample
comprised of AMT Masters, workers who have completed
at least 1000 hits with an approval rating >95%. The surveys had 133 (120) respondents. The distribution of gender
was 50% F, 50% M in the first survey and 46% F, 54% M
in the second. In both surveys, we only considered participants who had recalled being in an emergency situation
within the past year, so as to ensure that details of the situation were easier to remember. Several biases have been
noted in the general AMT population demographics (e.g.,
younger, female, seeking auxiliary income [44]), and these
biases should be considered when interpreting the results.
The results indicate that 12% of users turn to a Web
search engine in an emergency. Among those with a smartphone, 16% turned to search for additional assistance. Timecritical sessions constitute a small fraction of all search traffic. However, the high stakes of action in time-critical situations motivate efforts to detect and respond to urgency.
One goal of the survey was to understand the types of
urgent problems experienced among all users vs. those who
used a search engine. To gain insights about the distribution of urgent problems , we asked participants to categorize
their time-critical needs using a classification available from
the Medical Priority Dispatch System [12], a U.S. national
standard for 911 response coding. The distribution of problems reported by users is shown in Table 1. On the first
line, we show the distribution among all respondents (first
survey) and on the second line only those who had used a
search engine to pursue information on the urgent matter at
hand. Some differences are noticeable. While falls are the
most common category among all respondents, they are less
likely among those who used a search engine. A possible
explanation is that people better understand actions appropriate for helping with falls better than courses of action
appropriate for many other scenarios. The seriousness of a
situation, such as the onset of severe abdominal pain, and
ideal actions for addressing a concern may be more confusing. For example, “I try to see what was caus my abdominal
pain but couldn’t really come up with anything” and “Since
my pain was on my lower left side of my body, I did some
Google searches on symptoms of appendix problems” (we
note that pain from appendicitis is typically experienced on
the right or symmetrically across the abdomen ).

749

Table 2: Top categories of a random sample of positive and negative training data.
MeSH Positive Category (%)
Sample Queries from Positive Set
Bacterial Infections (18%)
[symptoms of appendicitis], [what do u do when u have strep]
Virus Diseases (12%)
[can you get shingles more than once], [pregnant flu symptoms]
Pathological Conditions (12%)
[sudden upper abdominal pain], [kidney stone signs]
Respiratory Tract Diseases (8%)
[pneumonia in the elderly], [pneumonia symptoms 1 year old]
Wounds and Injuries (6%)
[broken toe what to do], [sudden bruising in foot]
Pregnancy Complications (6%)
[having an iud and miscarrying symptims],[pregnancy calculator]
MeSH Negative Category(%)
Sample Queries from Negative Sessions
No Health Query (15%)
[what makes blood boil], [heart of glass], [protein shakes]
Reproductive Phenomena (10%)
[pregnancy calculator week by week], [can you ovulate twice in one month]
Organic Chemicals (8%)
[cexedrine], [azithromycin 250 mg], [divalproex er], [tylenol pm recall]
Pathological Conditions (7%)
[weight loss patch], [ingrown toenail]
Neoplasm (7%)
[esophageal cancer], [skin cancer], [signs of bone cancer in leg]
Heterocyclic Compounds (7%)
[what is melatonin usex for], [how long does hydrocodone stay in your system]

I was probably having a heart attack just because I was
having what felt like chest pain but I wasn’t.”
Summary of Survey Findings The survey showed that
12% of users turn to search engines for time-critical needs
and 16% among smartphone users among our respondents
have done so. We see from the responses that people are
using search for symptom searches in pursuit of diagnoses
and suggestions for what to do–and that there is somewhat
of a mismatch between general urgency and urgent search
needs. The key findings are: (1) people rely on search engines for urgent needs, (2) search is often used as a first
response in emergency situations, and (3) people are dissatisfied with search results in terms of both quality and
quantity of returned results, with advertisements appearing, and with the overall complexity of content. Many of
these challenges could be met by search engines if they had
the capability to understand the degree of urgency of users’
information needs, and could tailor the search experience
accordingly.
The challenges and opportunities raised in the survey frame
a larger research agenda on time-critical search, including
efforts to detect the time-criticality surrounding a query,
retrieving appropriate content, and the identification, construction or manual curation of content designed for assisting with action in urgent settings—when people are likely
under significant duress and cognitive load. We focus in this
paper on one step of the process: on identifying when a user
likely has a time-critical need. This triggering component
is a crucial, early step in the pipeline of providing useful,
timely help to users. We leave the task of finding or constructing useful time-critical content as a future direction.

Per the example in Figure 1, while we cannot be certain,
this sequence appears to represent someone trying to diagnose a possible stroke. The search for an emergency room
suggests that they believe the situation to be urgent. We realize that numerous urgent health situations do not lead to
such searches or calls to an emergency department. For example, information retrieved about the Heimlich Maneuver
may be used to assist someone with choking without resulting in a follow-on pursuit of professional medical assistance.
Conversely, people may seek out emergency care in cases
where it is not needed. For example, people with unfounded
anxiety about their health [56] may search for an emergency
room when such medical attention is not necessary. Nevertheless, we propose that searches for emergency medical
assistance are dominated by user-perceived time-criticality.
We explore this further in Section 5.
We seek to build and evaluate predictive models that can
identify a user in a time-critical situation. More specifically,
given a user’s search history and current search session, we
seek to predict if they are in a time-critical situation. To
do so, we employ supervised machine learning to develop a
classifier, leveraging sets of features and labeled data derived
from in situ search behavior.

4.

5.1 Automatic Label Generation

5. TRAINING DATA
We now describe how we automatically generate training
data, i.e., positive and negative time-critical sessions. To
better understand the nature of this data and to help verify
the utility of our method for automatically generating timecritical labels, we also characterize a small sample into an
existing medical taxonomy. We describe each of these steps
in the remainder of this section.

PRELIMINARIES

Search engine logs have been used to understand search
behavior [33, 55], predict future activity and interests [37,
15], improve search engines [32, 2], and learn about the
world [48, 11]. A search session is a contiguous sequence of
queries from a user with a short time gap between searches [15].
As a means of tagging for time criticality, we assume in our
study that a user has a time-critical health information need
if they seek an urgent care facility during the search session.
A user is noted as seeking assistance from an urgent care
facility if they issue a query, call by phone, or seek driving
directions to an emergency department.

750

We opt for the automated labeling of user sessions given
related challenges found with using human judges to assess
relevance [2], and the difficulty that we believe that human
annotators may experience in reliably labeling true urgency
solely from search queries. However, we cannot assume that
such phrases as “emergency room” indicate a time-critical
need, as such phrases can be used in other contexts, e.g., the
television show ER. Broader contextual information, such
as follow on searches can help with the discrimination task.
These challenges motivate the following method:
1. Identify sessions containing health queries.

6. FEATURES

2. Remove sessions containing adult content.
3. Among the remaining sessions, if a session contains a
search or call or directions for emergency room, and
the session ends or the topic of the session after this
search does not shift away from health, then the session
is labeled as positive for time criticality. Otherwise,
the session is labeled negative.

To identify a query as urgent, we defined several observational features. These features include characteristics of
the user, historical behavior of all previous users who issued
the query, words in queries observed thus far in the session,
situated features related to topical and behavioral aspects
in the session, as well as temporal and geospatial characteristics. A full description of these features can be found in
Table 3. We now explain the rationale behind the selection
of features.

Step (1) tends to eliminate non-health information needs.
Step (2) is a filter to improve data quality. Step (3) eliminates sessions that switch away from the health, demonstrating that the searcher is not consumed by the situation
and that it may not truly be urgent.

6.1 User Characteristics
Statistics published by the Centers for Disease Control
(CDC), based on ED visits between 1997-2011, show that
20% of adults visited an ED in the 12-month period, and 7%
visited the ED twice or more in that period [19]. By studying
a user’s longitudinal search behavior, we can better estimate
the likelihood that their current need is urgent. For example,
if a user already displays evidence of seeking urgent medical
attention (e.g., via the presence of searches for professional
health care) in the time period preceding the current health
search, it may be less likely that they have an urgent health
need related to the current query.
Other features of searchers’ longitudinal search behavior
may be useful for predicting an urgent need. For example, if
a searcher typically issues long queries but the average query
length in the current session is extremely short, the reduction in length may indicate something about the atypical
urgency of information needs at the current time.

5.2 Characterizing Training Data
To verify that the remaining sessions are labeled correctly
and to glean insights about the operation of the automated
labeling procedure, we randomly sampled 50 examples of
positive and negative cases from the tagged set. We manually categorized these sessions into the Medical Subject
Headings (MeSH) hierarchy produced by the National Library of Medicine [39]. The top categories of the positive
and negative sessions are shown in Table 2.
The top positive sessions are generally of a more urgent
nature than the negative sessions, including queries that seek
such information on broken bones, pneumonia in children,
and diagnosis of appendicitis. However, individual queries
are not sufficient for distinguishing time-critical from nonurgent settings. For example, [pregnancy calculator] appears
in both positive and negative data, but the surrounding context is different. In the positive set, the query was posed in
an Ale House, while in the negative data, the query was
posed in a residential area. We revisit the broader query
context, considering such factors as location, in Section 6.
Among the positive cases sampled, we found that one session was clearly non-urgent (user seeking an emergency center for Vicodin to evade a drug test for a construction job).
Other sessions labeled as positive include those where we are
uncertain about the true urgency of a situation (e.g., emergency room needed for strep throat). However, we note that
our goal is to predict when users believe they have an urgent
need and seek urgent care. We do not intend for search to
take on the role of an expert diagnostician.
The top five categories of the negative examples are also
shown in Table 2. We note that a large subset of sessions do
not include health-related queries, i.e., the health query categorizer mistakenly fires. Such queries may contain healthrelated terms, such as [what makes blood boil] and [protein shakes]. Ideally, the health query categorizer would not
make such mistakes. Nevertheless, these sessions truly are
negative cases, so the time-critical classifier should learn to
label these sessions negative.
Among the categories that fall into the MeSH hierarchy,
the largest negative category is Reproductive Phenomena.
This category contains queries such as [pregnancy tests].
Among the remaining categories, medication-related searches
are common, e.g., [tylenol] and [melatonin]. Cancer-related
sessions are also common.
While the category Pathological Conditions is common to
both the positive and negative training data, we found that
the queries in the positive examples are of a more acute nature. The positive set contains [kidney stones], [chest pain],
and [throwing up foam] while the negative data contains
[weight loss patch] and [ingrown toenail].

6.2 Historical Query Statistics
Query statistics about the query and browsing behavior
of populations of searchers provide additional information.
For example, the timing and nature of query refinements
and clickthrough information on search results can provide
insights about the adequacy of results. To this end, we include several historical query statistics for current health
query in our analysis, including the frequency with which
the query was received by the search engine and the corresponding clickthrough rate on search results.

6.3 Query Words
The terms appearing in the queries observed in the session
provide some insight into the nature of searchers’ information needs. The presence of words such as [help] provide
direct evidence of urgent information needs. However, more
subtle clues about time criticality may be present in a user’s
query stream, e.g., the mention of symptoms such as [chest
pain] or [choking], coupled with the presence of other terms
such as [tightness] or [trouble breathing]. Rather than specifying the words in advance of the prediction, by including the
words directly as a feature, our models have the opportunity
to learn which terms are important. Queries triggered by the
automatic labeling scheme, e.g.,[emergency room] were not
included in the bag of words as the existence of such terms
would determine the label of the session. We use the query
words as a baseline in the prediction experiments presented
later in the paper.

6.4 Situated Features
Features describing the current situation of the user could
be most telling about whether the information being sought
is urgent in nature. To capture aspects of the users’ context,

751

Table 3: Features used in predicting urgent information needs
Description of Features [Number of Features]
Words in the query (unigrams) [Undersampling: 2,132, Realistic: 56,429]
Number of times the query was issued, Average number of ad clicks per query instance,
Average number of result clicks per instance, Average dwell time of result clicks, Average
time to first result click, Average time to last result click, Average number of successful
clicks (dwell ≥ 30s), Average number of switches to other engine [43 – includes additional
if null features]
User-Related
Number of queries from current user, Number of sessions from current user, Number of
(preceding
cur- days with a query from current user, Number of days with a query from current user,
rent session)
Number of time-critical facility queries from current user, Number of calls or directions
from current user, Average query length for current user [7 features]
Situated
[43 features]:
Behavioral
Number of queries, Average term overlap between consecutive queries, Average length of
queries, Average time between queries, Number of queries without result clicks, Number
of queries with result clicks, Number of result clicks, Number of unique Web domains for
result clicks, Duration
Geospatial
Distance traveled, Average speed of travel, Altitude, Distance to nearest {urgent care
facility, hospital, park, mall, school, pitch (soccer field), recreation ground, body of water,
retail store, kindergarten, sports stadium, running track}
Temporal
Current query time in three hour bucket (e.g., 12PM-3PM), daylight (Between sunrise and
sunset in the location of query at day of year), working hours (hospital open), weekend,
Saturday, Sunday
Topical
Number of unique topics (based on top result for query), Number of topic changes between
consecutive queries, Number of health queries, Number of new (not in user history) topics,
Health query is new topic for user, Change in topic at health query (versus previous topic)
Feature Type
Bag of Words
Historic
Query
Statistics

change in topical interests at the point in time where health
queries assume the focus of attention.
We assigned topic labels to queries by automatically classifying the content of the top-ranked search results returned
for the search engine for that query. If no results were
returned by the engine, no label was assigned. Topic labels were taken from the 219 topics from the top two levels of the Open Directory Project (ODP, http://dmoz.org),
and included topics such as “Health/Medicine” and “Recreation/Sports”. The topics were assigned to pages based on
their content using a text-based classifier described and evaluated in [6]. The coverage of the classifier across all result
URLs in our test set was 96.8%; the remaining 3.2% of URLs
were unreachable at feature generation time.
Temporal Circadian rhythms play a role in people’s health
and well-being, and people are more prone to injury at certain times of the day. For example, the most dangerous
times for heart attack and for other cardiovascular emergencies, including sudden cardiac death, rupture or aneurysm of
the aorta, pulmonary embolism and stroke are the morning
and during the last phase of sleep. A recent study showed
that there is a threefold increase in the risk of myocardial
infarction in the three hours after waking, related to oscillations in the cardiovascular system [42]. Time of day may
also be indicative of the degree of surprise in a rising health
concern. A health query arriving at 2:00am may be more
remarkable (and indicative of an unforeseen health event)
than a health query arriving in the middle of the day.
Time also influences the nature of the activities that people are likely to be performing. During business hours (9AM5PM) on weekdays, people may be engaged in sedentary and
safe activities in office environments. In the evenings and on
weekends people may more typically pursue other interests,
bringing them into situations with higher risk of injury and

we developed a number of classes of features to represent
behavioral, topical, temporal, and geospatial aspects of the
user’s current situation. We refer to these observations as
situated features.
Behavioral Aspects of user search behavior may reveal additional distinctions about information needs. Search behaviors, such as the average number of clicks associated with a
particular query, have been used in previous research to understand the nature of the search intent, e.g., to distinguish
between informational and navigational search queries [53].
We hypothesize that search behaviors may also be useful in
distinguishing urgent from non-urgent needs. For example,
urgent needs may manifest as a rapid sequence of overlapping short queries, and less urgent queries may be characterized by longer inter-query times and more clickthrough
on content as searchers have the time to examine multiple
results in detail. To this end, we consider such attributes as
the number of queries issued in the session so far, the average time between those queries, and the number of search
results that were visited by searchers.
Topical We believed that the level of fluctuation in a user’s
topical interests and the sudden emergence of new topics
could by triggered by an urgent need. Topic-based features
capture the dynamics of interests in the session so far, as
well as the relationship between the topics that the user is
interested in and those observed in their long-term search
behavior. We hypothesize that, because urgent events are
rare, the emergence of a new topic (e.g., the initiation of a
health search) would reveal something about the rarity of
those events and increase the likelihood that an unforeseen
health event is occurring. We also consider the dynamism
of the searcher’s information needs within the session, e.g.,
to what extent are their topical interests stable (including
the past history of health queries), and whether there is a

752

of placing additional strain on their bodies—and creating
opportunity for unforeseen accidents. Indeed, examining the
positive examples in our data as a function of time-of-day
and day-of-week, we observe a greater likelihood of urgent
health searching occurring outside of working hours and on
weekends (Table 4). Note that this differs from when emergency rooms are more likely to receive visits [18], suggesting
that urgent search engine temporal patterns may differ from
ER visit patterns.
In addition to the absolute time at which a query is issued, we also consider whether the health search of interest
is conducted during daylight hours. Hours of darkness vary
depending on geographic location as well as time of year,
and the presence of darkness has been shown to affect injury likelihoods; accident statistics have shown that fatal
vehicular accidents are three times more likely at night than
during the day [54].
Geospatial Location may provide strong evidence about
the nature of the searcher’s current situation [3]. We compute proximity to locations where we suspect people might
be engaged in physical activity (parks, pitches, running tracks,
and recreation grounds) and locations where large numbers
of people are likely to gather (e.g., at stadiums or shopping malls) or EMS is hard to reach. Since children may be
particularly susceptible to injury, we also use the distance
from the location of the query to the nearest school. Since
speed of motion might reveal something about urgency, we
include both the current velocity and distance traveled since
last search query as features.
In addition to considering the activities that people are
likely to perform, we also consider the likelihood that they
could readily receive medical attention at their current location. We compute the distance from query location to the
nearest urgent care center, including EDs of hospitals. If
a searcher is near a medical facility, one might argue that
the query itself is less likely to represent a genuine cry for
help as medical attention is immediately available. We also
consider other details about the surrounding environment.
We consider whether the query was issued while the user
was over water (user is likely on a boat) and the altitude
of the user at query time (e.g., if high, user may be hiking or climbing). Both of these features provide evidence of
difficulty in reaching medical care soon and could influence
searchers turning to their mobile devices to seek assistance
so as to guide decisions about a course of action in advance
of receiving professional medical assistance.

7.

"
"

!
#$ !
#

Figure 2: ROC curves comparing the performance
of classifiers trained on user features, historic query
statistics, words in the query, situated signals and
all queries.
tics as seen in logs. Particular emphasis is given to positive
precision and positive recall. We also demonstrate that accuracy improves as the amount of session data used for feature
generation increases.

7.1 Experiment Setup
We collected six months of search activity from Bing mobile search spanning 9/2012 through 2/2013. The application is typically installed on tablets and mobile devices.
The mobile logs contain search queries, clicks, timestamp,
and real-time latitude and longitude users who consented to
share data when setting up the application. As expected,
the data is severely skewed towards the negative examples;
we found 536 positive examples and 945,989 negative examples (99.4% negatives and 0.6% positives).
In our experiments, we train a boosted tree classifier [21].
We perform a 10-fold cross validation, repeating each 10
times. Results are reported in terms of precision and recall.
Positive precision is the fraction of sessions predicted timecritical that actually are time critical. Positive recall is the
fraction of actual time-critical sessions that are predicted
time-critical (and similarly for negative precision and recall).

INFERRING TIME CRITICALITY

7.2 Downsampling

We develop a classifier that can distinguish between the
positives and negatives using the set of features described
above. As the data is heavily skewed to negatives, a classification policy that always predicts negative would have a
high classification accuracy. For our initial study, we sample
a smaller set from the negatives, so that we have an equal
number of positives and negatives [30]. The benefit of such
downsampling is that the performance of a random guessing
baseline is 50%. Such an event split enables us to tease out
the effects of including various features.
While the study of classification constructed with balanced data can build insights, that target is use in a realistic
setting. Our second set of experiments probe the value of
the methods in a realistic scenario: we train on one month
of data and test on the following month with actual statis-

Our first experiment uses balanced data, constructed via
downsampling. We assess the predictive power of different
categories of features by separately training classifiers with
distinct sets of features per the categories of features in Section 6, i.e., words in the query, user features, historic query
statistics, situated only features, and all features. We assess
each of the categories separately to understand their intrinsic benefit. An alternative is to perform feature ablations,
but that depends highly on the order in which features are
removed and is affected by interactions between feature categories.
The classical approach for text categorization [16] involves
representing the query as a bag of words. Phrases are not
known to add predictive power over words [4], so we focus

753

Table 4: Distribution of day of week and time of day when positive and negative sessions take place. Positive
sessions are more likely on the weekends and night time/early morning.
Day of Week Positive (%) Negative (%) Difference
Time of Day Positive (%) Negative (%) Difference
Monday
14%
15%
-1
12am-3am
16%
13%
+3
Tuesday
12%
15%
-3
3am-6am
17%
15%
+2
Wednesday
11%
15%
-4
6am-9am
16%
16%
0
Thursday
13%
15%
-2
9am-12pm
18%
18%
0
Friday
13%
13%
0
12pm-3pm
10%
20%
-10
Saturday
19%
13%
+6
3pm-6pm
8%
9%
-1
Sunday
18%
14%
+4
6pm-9pm
7%
3%
+4
9pm-12am
8%
6%
+2
Table 5: Evaluation of the predictive power of different feature subsets obtained via downsampling the
negative examples. Numbers are averages (standard deviation) over 10 runs.
Features
Accuracy
Positive
Positive
Negative
Negative
Area Under
Precision
Recall
Precision
Recall
Curve
Bag of Words
0.665 (0.044)
0.706 (0.057)
0.574 (0.068)
0.639 (0.040)
0.757 (0.059)
0.712 (0.044)
Query Statistics
0.610 (0.047)
0.606 (0.055)
0.590 (0.069)
0.618 (0.044)
0.631 (0.081)
0.650 (0.054)
User-related
0.556 (0.044)
0.562 (0.045)
0.551 (0.066)
0.551 (0.045)
0.562 (0.066)
0.587 (0.047)
Situated
0.771 (0.042)
0.806 (0.057)
0.697 (0.057)
0.749 (0.038)
0.841 (0.056)
0.834 (0.040)
All
0.815 (0.042)
0.846 (0.059)
0.745 (0.068)
0.797 (0.044)
0.877 (0.054)
0.876 (0.040)
ranked feature by predictive power is altitude. We could
identify time-critical sessions in mountainous regions where
a mobile device may be the only source of information. Note
that situational features perform better than bag of words
despite the fact that there are many more word features
(2132 words vs. 43 situated).
Finally, we trained a classifier on all of the above features
and achieved an accuracy of 82%. It is striking that the situational features provide a great deal of the predictive power
of the classifier. The exact words in the query do not matter
as much as the circumstances of the user. Figure 2 shows a
receiver-operator characteristic (ROC) curve comparing the
performance of classifiers based on (1) user, (2) query statistics, (3) bag of words (4) situational, and (5) all features.
All paired differences in differences in accuracy are strongly
statistically significant using a t-tests (p-value < 0.001).

on words only. Since our underlying data comprises search
sessions, our bag of words contains all queries up to and
including the first health query of a session. As our goal is
early detection of time criticality, we seek to detect timecriticality after the arrival of the first health query. The
overall accuracy of the bag-of-words classifier is 66% and a
detailed breakdown by precision and recall is displayed in
Table 5.
Next, we experimented with historical query statistics.
These features are based on the activity trails of users who
had issued the query. A categorizer built exclusively on these
features is 61% accurate. The features with the most predictive power are average amount of time spent on clicked
search results, average time to first click, and features related
to switching search engines. All of these features capture a
user in a more panicked state, i.e., dwelling less, clicking
faster, and quickly shifting to another search engine in hope
of finding better content.
We found that user-related features have little predictive power in themselves. The overall accuracy of classifiers based solely on user-related features is 55%, which is
only marginally better than random guessing 50%. Such
a result is not unexpected as relying solely on a user’s behavior preceding the current session is not likely to contain
enough information to predict time-criticality on a future
emergency.
Harnessing situation-related features (topics, location, altitude, proximity to sites and resources, and time of day)
enables classification of time criticality with a classification
accuracy of 77%, with significant boosts in positive and negative precision and recall. Digging deeper into these situational features, the most predictive are session-related and
include the number of new and unique topics by the user.
Other situational features are related to what we can infer
from a user’s location, specifically distance to closest stadium, hospital, park, mall, retail store, and school. These
features suggest that the user is away from home, e.g., attending an event in a stadium or park, shopping at a mall
or store, or in a playground at school. The next highest-

7.3 Realistic Setting
In a more realistic scenario, we can train and test on a
larger set of negative data. In the next experiment, we train
on sessions collected in January 2013 and evaluate on sessions collected in February 2013. The breakdown of data in
January 2013 is 139 positives, 230K negatives and February
2013 is similar 136 positives, 238K negatives. The positives
are needles in a haystack of negatives. Although they are
rare, they may represent an extremely critical information
need. Using all the features, we now compare our ability to
predict time criticality after the first and after the last health
query in a session. The goal is to show that even if we miss a
time-critical session after the first health query, we can still
flag it as the session progresses. Note that we must be careful not to use words later in the session that contain timecritical facilities such as “emergency room,âĂİ since that is
how we labeled sessions positive. Thus, queries containing
time-critical facilities are not included in the bag of words.
Session features can get richer as the session progresses, so
there is potential for improving prediction performance by
employing features beyond the first health query, including

754

Session-depth
First health query
Last health query

Table 6: Prediction results for realistic setting.
Accuracy
Positive
Positive
Negative
Precision
Recall
Precision
0.999
0.875
0.883
0.999
0.999
0.888
0.928
≈1

Area Under
Curve
0.999
0.999

9. FUTURE WORK AND DIRECTIONS

such behavioral information as whether a user shifted to a
non-urgent topic.
The results for the realistic setting are shown in Table 6.
Total accuracy, as well as negative precision and recall, are
not important in this experiment, as a classifier that labels
every example negative will have good performance for these
measures. Instead, we attend to the positive precision and
positive recall. Positive precision (88%) is higher than seen
in the experiment with downsampled data (82%). However,
there is not much difference in positive precision between the
first and last health query on all data. Conversely, positive
recall improves with using information up to the last healthrelated query (from 88% to 93%); more session data means
more opportunity to detect time criticality.

8.

Negative
Recall
0.999
0.999

We believe that time-critical search is important and underexplored. By coupling machine learning along with defining a set of rich situational features, we showed that timecritical queries can be detected automatically. The findings
of this study are promising. Nevertheless, much work remains on developing and evaluating retrieval technologies
to support searchers faced with urgent, emergency situations. One of the key challenges is providing users with access to content that is easy to comprehend and is actionable
in real-time, considering distractions and cognitive load in
urgent situations. Even relevant pages may contain complex
and lengthy textual descriptions and obfuscating advertisements and graphics. The automatic identification of accurate, succinct, and visually compelling videos or easy-todigest graphics on procedures could be of tremendous help
to people with urgent needs. In addition, the mobile phone
provides additional sensors (location, microphone, camera,
accelerometer) that could assist a user beyond web pages.
We believe that there is great promise in combining methods for identifying urgent information needs with methods
for identifying or generating content – as well as using the
phone as a sensor – to develop an end-to-end approach at
assisting searchers in time-critical settings.

DISCUSSION AND IMPLICATIONS

We provided evidence that people turn to search engines
for urgent needs. Via surveys and large-scale search log analysis, we quantified and characterized urgent behavior. We
identified a set of novel predictive features, especially those
that are situational in nature, including location, altitude,
proximity to specific sites and resources, and time of day.
Using these features, we developed a machine learning classifier that can provide accurate predictions about the level
of urgency associated with search sessions. These predictions can be used by search systems to determine whether
specialized ranking or interface support should be offered.
Our work has limitations that are important to consider.
First, as mentioned earlier, the AMT population is known to
be biased in a variety of ways [44]. We asked crowdworkers
for their gender and state of residence to determine if our
samples were overly skewed. However, we did not ask for income and other potentially relevant demographics. In addition, search engine logs inherently reflect a biased population
of the US. For example, we may be missing signals from people who do not have access to computers or search engines.
Finally, the training data that we generate is also imperfect:
a user may search for an emergency room and not really
be in an urgent state and users facing a time-critical situation may not search for or call a nearby emergency room.
To address this, more work is needed on methods to attain
ground truth about urgency from logged searchers, perhaps
by constructing pools of consenting searchers who are willing to share additional details about their search situations
in addition to their logged search activity.
Our findings have several implications for search engines
and IR more broadly. Search engines should consider estimated urgency as an important aspect of the retrieval. Recognizing urgency of a session or an individual search query
is only a first step in a larger pipeline of time-critical analysis, content generation, and information display. Multiple
designs for assistance are feasible and need to be studied.
These designs extend beyond IR. For example, if search engines can determine that a user has an urgent need, actions
such as notifying emergency services might be taken.

Acknowledgments
We thank Isabelle Stanton for early help with the survey.

10. REFERENCES
[1] E. Agichtein, E. Brill, and S. Dumais. Improving web
search ranking by incorporating user behavior information.
In Proc. SIGIR, pages 19–26, 2006.
[2] R. Agrawal, A. Halverson, K. Kenthapadi, N. Mishra, and
P. Tsaparas. Generating labels from clicks. In WSDM,
pages 172–181, 2009.
[3] L. Backstrom, J. Kleinberg, R. Kumar, and J. Novak.
Spatial variation in search engine queries. In WWW, pages
357–366, 2008.
[4] R. Bekkerman and J. Allan. Using bigrams in text
categorization. Technical report, Department of Computer
Science, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, 2004.
[5] P. Bennett, F. Radlinski, R. White, and E. Yilmaz.
Inferring and using location metadata to personalize web
search. In Proc. SIGIR, pages 135–144, 2011.
[6] P. Bennett, K. Svore, and S. Dumais. Classification
enhanced ranking. In WWW, pages 111–120, 2010.
[7] P. Bennett, R. White, W. Chu, S. Dumais, P. Bailey,
F. Borisyuk, and X. Cui. Modeling the impact of short- and
long-term behavior on search personalization. In Proc.
SIGIR, pages 185–194, 2012.
[8] D. Bingham and B.J. Hailey. The time-urgency component
of the type a behavior pattern. J. Applied Social
Psychology, 19:425–432, 1989.
[9] A.L. Brown, N.C. Mann, M. Daya, et al. Demographic,
belief, and situational factors influencing the decision to
utilize emergency medical services among chest pain
patients. Circulation, 102(2):173–178, 2000.

755

[36] F. Landy, H. Rastegary, J. Thayer, and C. Colvin. Time
urgency: The construct and its measurement. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 76(5):644–657, 1991.
[37] T. Lau and E. Horvitz. Patterns of search: Analyzing and
modeling web query refinement. In Proc. UM, pages
119–128, 1999.
[38] E. Lerner, T. Rea, B. Bobrow, et al. Emergency medical
service dispatch cardiopulmonary resuscitation prearrival
instructions to improve survival from out-of-hospital
cardiac arrest. Circulation, 125(4):648–655, 2012.
[39] C. Lipscomb. Medical subject headings (MeSH). Bulletin of
the Medical Library Association, 88(3):265, 2000.
[40] J. Liu and N. Belkin. Personalizing information retrieval for
people with different levels of topic knowledge. In JCDL,
pages 383–384, 2010.
[41] D. Mountain and A. Macfarlane. Geographic information
retrieval in a mobile environment: evaluating the needs of
mobile individuals. J. Info. Science, 33(5):515–530, 2007.
[42] J. Muller, P. Stone, Z. Turi, J. Rutherford, et al. Circadian
variation in the frequency of onset of acute myocardial
infarction. NEJM, 313(21):1315–1322, 1985.
[43] K. Murugiah, A. Vallakati, K. Rajput, A. Sood, and
N. Challa. Youtube as a source of information on
cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Resuscitation,
82(3):332–334, 2011.
[44] G. Paolacci, J. Chandler, and P. Ipeirotis. Running
experiments on amazon mechanical turk. Judgment and
Decision Making, 5(5):411–419, 2010.
[45] K. Radinsky and E. Horvitz. Mining the web to predict
future events. In WSDM, pages 255–264, 2013.
[46] K. Radinsky, K.. Svore, S.. Dumais, M. Shokouhi,
J. Teevan, A. Bocharov, and E. Horvitz. Behavioral
dynamics on the web: Learning, modeling, and prediction.
ACM TOIS, 31(3), 2013.
[47] B.J. Rhodes and P. Maes. Just-in-time information retrieval
agents. IBM Systems journal, 39(3.4):685–704, 2000.
[48] M. Richardson. Learning about the world through
long-term query logs. TWEB, 2(4), 2008.
[49] M. Shokouhi and K. Radinsky. Time-sensitive query
auto-completion. In Proc. SIGIR, pages 601–610, 2012.
[50] D.B. Siepmann, N.C. Mann, J.R. Hedges, and M.R. Daya.
Association between prepayment systems and emergency
medical services use among patients with acute chest
discomfort syndrome. Annals of emergency medicine,
35(6):573–578, 2000.
[51] M. Smucker and C. Clarke. Time-based calibration of
effectiveness measures. In Proc. SIGIR, pages 95–104, 2012.
[52] B. Tan, X. Shen, and C. Zhai. Mining long-term search
history to improve search accuracy. In Proc. KDD, pages
718–723, 2006.
[53] J. Teevan, S. Dumais, and D. Liebling. To personalize or
not to personalize: modeling queries with variation in user
intent. In SIGIR, pages 163–170, 2008.
[54] C. Varghese and U. Shankar. Passenger vehicle occupant
fatalities by day and night–a contrast. In National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration, 2007.
[55] R. White and S. Drucker. Investigating behavioral
variability in web search. In WWW, pages 21–30, 2007.
[56] R. White and E. Horvitz. Cyberchondria: Studies of the
escalation of medical concerns in web search. ACM Trans.
Inf. Syst., 27(4):23:1–23:37, 2009.
[57] R.W. White, N.P. Tatonetti, N.H. Shah, R.B. Altman, and
E. Horvitz. Web-scale pharmacovigilance: listening to
signals from the crowd. JAMIA, 20(3):404–408, 2013.

[10] J.G. Canto, R.J. Zalenski, J.P. Ornato, et al. Use of
emergency medical services in acute myocardial infarction.
Circulation, 106(24):3018–3023, 2002.
[11] H. Choi and H. Varian. Predicting the present with google
trends. Economic Record, 88(s1):2–9, 2012.
[12] J. Clawson. Medical priority dispatch system. In Wikipedia,
2014.
[13] N. Cohen. ’Suicide’ query prompts Google to offer hotline.
In NYT, April 2010.
[14] A. Crescenzi, R. Capra, and J. Arguello. Time pressure,
user satisfaction and task difficulty. In ASIST, 2013.
[15] D. Downey, S. Dumais, and E. Horvitz. Models of searching
and browsing: Languages, studies, and application. In Proc.
IJCAI, pages 2740–2747, 2007.
[16] S. Dumais, J. Platt, D. Heckerman, and M. Sahami.
Inductive learning algorithms and representations for text
categorization. In Proc. CIKM, pages 148–155, 1998.
[17] G. Dupret and B. Piwowarski. A user browsing model to
predict search engine click data from past observations. In
Proc. SIGIR, pages 331–338, 2008.
[18] National Center for Health Statistics. National hospital
ambulatory medical care survey: 2006 emergency
department summary. In Center for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2008.
[19] National Center for Health Statistics. Special feature on
emergency care. In CDC and Prevention, 2012.
[20] S. Fox and M. Duggan. Health online 2013. Pew Internet
and American Life Project, 2013.
[21] J. Friedman. Greedy function approximation: a gradient
boosting machine. A. of Statistics, pages 1189–1232, 2001.
[22] J. Ginsberg, M. Mohebbi, R. Patel, L. Brammer,
M. Smolinski, and L. Brilliant. Detecting influenza
epidemics using search engine query data. Nature,
457(7232):1012–1014, 2008.
[23] R. Horne, D. James, K. Petrie, J. Weinman, and
R. Vincent. Patients’ interpretation of symptoms as a cause
of delay in reaching hospital during acute myocardial
infarction. Heart, 83(4):388–393, 2000.
[24] E. Horvitz. Principles and applications of continual
computation. Artificial Intelligence J., 126:159–196, 2001.
[25] E. Horvitz and M. Barry. Display of information for
time-critical decision making. In UAI, pages 296–305, 1995.
[26] E. Horvitz, A. Jacobs, and D. Hovel. Attention-sensitive
alerting. In Proc. UAI, pages 305–313, 1999.
[27] E Horvitz and G Rutledge. Time-dependent utility and
action under uncertainty. In UAI, pages 151–158, 1991.
[28] E. Horvitz and A. Seiver. Time-critical action:
Representations and application. In Proc. UAI, pages
250–257, 1997.
[29] P. Ingwersen and K. Järvelin. The turn: Integration of
information seeking and retrieval in context, volume 18.
Springer, 2005.
[30] N. Japkowicz. The class imbalance problem: Significance
and strategies. In International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, pages 111–117, 2000.
[31] K. Jarvelin, S.L. Price, L.M.L. Delcambre, , and M.L.
Nielsen. Discounted cumulated gain based evaluation of
multiple-query ir systems. In Proc. ECIR, pages 4–15, 2008.
[32] T. Joachims. Optimizing search engines using clickthrough
data. In Proc. KDD, pages 133–142, 2002.
[33] T. Joachims, L. Granka, B. Pan, H. Hembrooke,
F. Radlinski, and G. Gay. Evaluating the accuracy of
implicit feedback from clicks and query reformulations in
web search. TOIS, 25(2):7, 2007.
[34] M. Kamvar and S. Baluja. A large scale study of wireless
search behavior: Google mobile search. In Proc. SIGCHI,
pages 701–709, 2006.
[35] J. Landgren. Making action visible in time-critical work. In
Proc. SIGCHI, pages 201–210, 2006.

756

