Hashtag Recommendation for Hyperlinked Tweets
Surendra Sedhai

Aixin Sun

School of Computer Engineering
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

School of Computer Engineering
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

surendra001@e.ntu.edu.sg

axsun@ntu.edu.sg

ABSTRACT

h1

Presence of hyperlink in a tweet is a strong indication of tweet being more informative. In this paper, we study the problem of hashtag recommendation for hyperlinked tweets (i.e., tweets containing
links to Web pages). By recommending hashtags to hyperlinked
tweets, we argue that the functions of hashtags such as providing the right context to interpret the tweets, tweet categorization,
and tweet promotion, can be extended to the linked documents.
The proposed solution for hashtag recommendation consists of two
phases. In the first phase, we select candidate hashtags through five
schemes by considering the similar tweets, the similar documents,
the named entities contained in the document, and the domain of
the link. In the second phase, we formulate the hashtag recommendation problem as a learning to rank problem and adopt RankSVM
to aggregate and rank the candidate hashtags. Our experiments on
a collection of 24 million tweets show that the proposed solution
achieves promising results.

h2

h3

d1

t2

d2

t3

d3

Figure 1: Hashtag, hyperlinked tweet, and linked document
tags not only provide the right context to interpret the tweets and
to categorize tweets, but also serve as a medium to promote tweets
to reach more readers. Appropriate hashtag usages therefore benefit many applications (e.g., tweet search, tweet classification, and
event detection). Despite the importance of hashtags, large portion of tweets, including many hyperlinked tweets, do not contain
hashtags.
In this paper, we focus on the problem of hashtag recommendation for hyperlinked tweets, which is to recommend appropriate
hashtags to tweets containing hyperlinks. Figure 1 illustrates a conceptual model consisting of hashtags, hyperlinked tweets, and the
linked documents. An edge exists between a hashtag and a hyperlinked tweet if the tweet is annotated with the hashtag (e.g., h1 and
t 1 ). Similarly, an edge between a tweet and a document exists if
the document is linked from the tweet (e.g., t 1 and d 1 ). We argue
that through hyperlinked tweets, the functions of hashtags can be
extended to the content of the linked documents. That is, the hashtags convey additional contextual information to the linked documents, facilitate the topical categorization of these documents, and
serve as a medium to propagate the documents to more readers in
Twitter. It is reported that presence of link in a tweet is strong indication of tweet being more informative [2]. Compared with many
non-hyperlinked tweets (e.g., those about daily activities), we believe that a user is more willing to share a hyperlinked tweet with
larger audience. However, links in Twitter are mostly encoded in
short URLs which neither provide any hint about the information
source nor the content of the links. Hence, readers do not have any
clue about a link unless the tweet provides a good description. Such
description often relies on the right context provided by hashtags.
For example, hashtags like #NBA and #sigir2014 provide the right
context to understand both the tweet and the link. However, users
may not be aware of the relevant hashtags for their tweets due to
lack of exposure to the relevant hashtags [10]. Hence, hashtag recommendation system can play an important role to improve user
experience in microblogging.
Existing work on hashtag recommendation do not consider the
embedded links in tweets, which is an important source of information. In this paper, we recommend hashtags to hyperlinked tweets

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search
and Retrieval—Information Filtering

Keywords
Hashtag recommendation; Microblog, Tweets; Learning to rank

1.

t1

INTRODUCTION

Twitter is a popular platform for users to share personal activities
to their friends, as well as to share interesting online resources (e.g.,
news articles, Web pages) to the large audience. It has been reported that many of the trending topics in Twitter are headline news
or persistent news, making Twitter a form of news media [3, 4].
Many of such news pieces are shared through tweets with hyperlinks to Web pages. In this study, we call a tweet containing one or
more hyperlinks to external documents a hyperlinked tweet.
Hashtags (#-prefixed keywords) are often used to provide topical
or contextual information about tweets. For this reason, hashtags
are frequently used as queries to search for tweets about a topic or
a specific event (e.g., #NBA and #sigir2014). In other words, hashPermission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR’14, July 6–11, 2014, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07 ...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2609452.

831

by first selecting candidate hashtags through five schemes utilizing
both the content of tweet and the linked Web pages (e.g., by similar
tweets and similar Web pages, by named entities in the Web pages).
We then aggregate and rank the candidate hashtags by formulating this problem as a learning to rank problem. Experiments on a
collection of 24 million tweets demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed approach. We show that the proposed solution is effective
in combining the strength of the tweet content and the embedded
link. Because of the additional information, hashtag recommendation for hyperlinked tweets is expected to achieve better accuracy
than that for non-hyperlinked tweets, making hashtag recommendation a more practical application for users.

2.

process effectively reduces the search space of possible hashtags to
be recommended to a tweet, facilitating more efficient recommendation. Candidate hashtags are selected as follows.
Hashtags from Similar Tweets and Similar Web Pages. Based
on the assumption that topically similar tweets are more likely to be
annotated by similar hashtags, we search for candidate hashtags by
using the similar tweets to the given tweet t. Cosine similarity and
TFIDF weighting scheme are adopted in this search. The top 20
most voted hashtags are selected by using the top 50 most similar
tweets following the setting in [5]. Based on the discussion that the
functions of hashtags can be extended to the linked documents (see
Section 1), we also assume that similar Web pages are annotated
by similar hashtags and search for candidate hashtags by using the
similar Web pages in a similar manner. Another 20 candidate hashtags are obtained.

RELATED WORK

In this section, we review hashtag recommendation to tweets and
the applications of learning to rank on tweets.

Hashtags based on the Domain of the Link. In our dataset, we
observe that hashtags often reflect the topics of the linked Web site.
Let ℓ d be the domain of hyperlink ℓ. We select the top 20 hashtags by P(h|ℓ d ), which is the probability that h is used to annotate
a tweet containing links from domain ℓ d . For example, hashtags
#news, #cnn, and #breaking are candidate hashtags for links from
domain edition.cnn.com.

Tag Recommendation. Tags provide description and contextual
information to online resources. Similarity based tag recommendation system has been widely adopted to recommend tags for similar
resources. A recent study shows that cosine similarity with TFIDF
weighting scheme is the most appropriate measure to retrieve similar microblog posts [12]. Using cosine similarity, [5] recommends
hashtags by combining hashtags obtained from similar tweets as
well as hashtags from similar users. In our proposed solution, we
select candidate hashtags by finding similar tweets and similar Web
pages by using cosine similarity. Based on the assumption that both
tweet content and hashtags are about the same theme but written in
different languages, statistical machine translation techniques have
been used for hashtag recommendation [1, 7]. In our solution, we
also adopt the language translation model. However, we use named
entities instead of all words in a Web page based on the observation
that some hashtags are named entities in the linked Web pages.
Though tag co-occurrence has been used to recommend tags for
many online resources (e.g., photos in Flickr [11]), co-occurrence
of hashtags in Twitter is intrinsically different from most others
due to the length constraint of tweet. Hence, tag recommendation
method suitable for photos in Flickr or other online resources may
not be directly applicable for hashtag recommendation for tweets.

Hashtags based on the Named Entities in the linked Web Page.
Named entities appearing in a Web page are important topic indicators of the page. We also observe that some of the named entities
are directly adopted as hashtags in the hyperlinked tweets. We use
two models to select candidate hashtags for a tweet based on the
named entities in its linked Web page: Random Walk with Restart
(RWR) model [9] and Language Translation (LT) model [7].
Random Walk with Restart (RWR) model. We construct an entityhashtag graph where there are two sets of nodes Ne and Nh (see
Figure 2(a)). Ne = {ei } is the set of nodes corresponding to the
named entities in the Web page linked from tweet t. Nh = {h j } is
the set of nodes corresponds to a subset of hashtags in the data collection. A hashtag is included in this graph if it can be reached from
any of the named entity node ei ∈ Ne through the edges. There are
three kinds of directed edges: ei → h j , h j → ei , and h j → hk ,
weighed by P(h j |ei ), P(ei |h j ), and P(hk |h j ), respectively.2 The
first two conditional probabilities are computed by the number of
times a hashtag h j is used to annotate a tweet linking to a document containing an named entity ei , with respect to the frequencies
of ei and h j respectively. The last conditional probability is the
asymmetric hashtag co-occurrence. Only the edges with positive
weights are included in the graph.
To apply RWR model, let ~r be the restart vector of dimensionality |Ne | + |Nh |, where | · | denotes the cardinality of a set. The
entries corresponding to named entities in ~r are set to 1 and the
entries corresponding to hashtags are set to 0. Let P be the transition matrix derived from the weights computed above. Let α be the
restart probability which was set to 0.75 in our experiments. The
steady state value of ~v is computed using the following formula.
The top 20 hashtags with highest corresponding values in ~v are selected as candidate hashtags. Note that, ~v is randomly initialized.

Learning to Rank: Learning to rank is a task of automatically constructing a ranking model using training data, such that the model
can sort new objects according to their degrees of relevance, preference, or importance [6]. Recently, learning to rank has been applied
to many tweet search tasks, i.e., ranking tweets by their relevance
to search queries [2, 8, 13]. In our solution, we adopt the pairwise
learning to rank framework realized by RankSVM to rank the candidate hashtags obtained from different selection schemes.

3.

HASHTAG RECOMMENDATION

Given a hyperlinked tweet t containing link ℓ to a Web page, our
task is to recommend a list of hashtags that are most relevant to
the tweet.1 Our proposed hashtag recommendation method has two
phases: candidate hashtag selection and hashtag ranking. We now
present the two phases in detail.

3.1

~v = (1 − α)~v P + α~r

Candidate Hashtag Selection

Candidate hashtag selection is a process of selecting a subset of
hashtags from all existing hashtags that have been used to annotated any of the observed tweets with or without hyperlinks. This

Language Translation (LT) model. In this model we consider the
named entities and hashtags as descriptions of the same content in
two different languages. Again, let Ne be the set of named enti-

1 In our data collection of 24 million tweets, more than 96% of hyperlinked tweets
each contain only one link. For easy presentation, we assume each tweet contains one
link, although the proposed method can be easily extended to handle multiple links.

2 In our experiments, we have also evaluated the graph with edges between two named
entities weighted by P(e k |e i ) . This version of the graph leads to poorer recommendation accuracy hence is not reported due to page limit.

832

...

h2
...

100K
10K
1K
100
10
1

en

Percentage of tweets (%)

e2

60

1M

h1
Number of hashtags

e1

hm

(a) Entity-hashtag Graph

1

10

100
1K
10K
Hashtag frequency

100K

1M

50
40
30
20
10
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 >10

Number of hashtags per tweet

(b) Hashtag distribution

(c) Number of hashtag per tweet

Figure 2: Entity-hashtag graph, hashtag frequency distribution, and number of hashtags per tweet
ties appearing in the document linked from tweet t, the score of a
hashtag h j is computed by:
Score(h j ) =

X

in any of the four Web sites: bbc, cnn, nytimes and reddit. After duplicate removal, there are 75 categories including sports,
technology, business, movie, jobs etc.
3. Is Popular Domain. This feature is set to 1 if the hashtag matches
one of the top 5000 most popular domains in our dataset.
4. Matches Domain. This feature is set to 1 if the hashtag matches
the domain of the link contained in the tweet.
The second set of 4 features is proposed based on the observation
that hashtags are often used to topically categorize tweet content.
We also observe that many Web sites themselves are topically indicative (e.g., Yelp for business review, CNN for news).

P(h j |ei )

e i ∈N e

where, P(h j |ei ) is the same conditional probability as in the RWR
model. Similarly, from this model, we obtain 20 candidate hashtags
with highest scores.

3.2

Recommendation by Learning to Rank

Observe that each of the candidate hashtag selection methods
presented above can be used as a stand-alone hashtag recommendation method, because the candidate hashtags are ranked by their
corresponding selection criteria. In particular, candidate hashtag
selection by similar tweets is the hashtag recommendation method
proposed in [5] (not considering the hashtags by similar users).
However, to benefit from all candidate selection methods, we propose to aggregate all selected candidate hashtags and rank them.
More specifically, we formulate the hashtag recommendation task
as a learning to rank problem.

4.

EXPERIMENTS

Dataset. We collected two months (May 1 to Jun 30, 2013) of
sampled tweets from Twitter using twitter streaming API guided
by hashtags.org. More specifically, we used the hashtags in “trending up” and “trending down” categories in hashtags.org as query
keywords to search for tweets on daily basis. A tweet is returned
if it contains the query keyword as its hashtag or as a word in its
content. On average 135 hashtags were used as query keywords in
each day. In total, we have collected 24 million tweets published by
11.9 million users. The collected tweets contain 6.9 million links
with 3.4 million distinct URLs after resolving the short URLs. We
managed to download 2.05 million URLs ignoring the deadlinks
and links requires login (e.g., Facebook links). Among them, 1.37
million are in English.4

Pairwise Learning to Rank. We represent each candidate hashtag as a feature vector and use pairwise learning to rank method to
find the top ranked hashtags from the candidate set. Given a tweet
t, let h+
i be a positive hashtag that is selected as a candidate hashtag and is used to annotate tweet t; let h− be a negative hashtag
that is selected as a candidate hashtag but is not used to annotate t.
Then the pair hh+ , h− i is a positive instance and hh− , h+ i is a negative instance in learning the model. Each pair is represented by the
vector difference between the feature vectors of the two hashtags,
to be detailed shortly. In the test phase, each candidate hashtag
is paired with the rest of the candidate hashtags and then classified by using the learned model. Let Hc be the set of candidate
hashtags.PThe recommendation score of candidate hashtag hi is:
f (hi ) = h j ∈Hc ,h i ,h j I (hi , h j ), where I (hi , h j ) = 1 if hhi , h j i is
classified as positive and 0 otherwise.

Dataset Analysis. In our dataset, about 30% of tweets contain
hashtags probably due to the fact that the tweets were collected
by using hashtags as queries. In total, there are about 1 million distinct hashtags which appear for about 20 million times. Figure 2(b)
plots the hashtag frequency distribution where a power-law like distribution is observed as expected. Among the tweets containing
hashtags, slightly more than half of them each contain one hashtag. Relatively, it is rare to have more than 3 hashtags in a tweet,
shown in Figure 2(c). After processing the linked Web pages (e.g.,
parsing out the textual content and extracting the named entities5),
we observe that 12.65% of tweets contain named entities from their
linked Web pages as hashtags. This accounts only the single-word
hashtags without segmentation. Besides named entities, broad categories such as sports, news, business are also widely used hashtags.
Moreover, domain names such as NBA, TED, CNN are found to be
used as hashtags frequently. Among hyperlinked tweets, more than
96% of tweets each contain only one link.

Features. We use two sets of binary features (i.e., the value of each
feature is either 1 or 0).3 The first set contains 5 features where
each feature corresponds to a candidate hashtag selection scheme.
Each of the 5 dimensions are set to 1 if the candidate hashtag is
selected by similar tweet, similar Web page, domain of the link,
named entities with RWR, and named entities by LT, respectively.
The second set of 4 features utilizes Wikipedia, category list and
domain related information, detailed below.
1. Wikipedia. This feature is set to 1 if the hashtag appears as an
anchor text in a Wikipedia entry. The list of anchor texts are
parsed from the English Wikipedia dump on January 30, 2010.
2. Is Category. This feature is set to 1 if the hashtag is one of the
top-level category in Yahoo! hierarchy, or it matches a category

Methods in Comparison. We evaluated 7 methods in our experiments, summarized in Table 1. Recall that each of the candidate
hashtag selection methods can be used to recommend hashtags. We
use these 5 methods as baseline in our evaluation. The first method
4 Java library: http://code.google.com/p/language-detection/
5 Stanford NER: http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/CRF-NER.shtml

3 We have also evaluated the non-binary weighting scheme of the same set of features
(e.g., the feature values are normalized to [0, 1]) but observed poorer performance.

833

0.4

0.5
SimilarTweet
SimilarPage
DomainFreqTag
NamedEntity-RWR
NamedEntity-LT
RankSVM
RankSVM++

0.3

0.2

0.6
0.5

0.4

0.4
0.3
0.3
0.2
0.2

0.1

0.0

0.1

Pr@1

Pr@2

Pr@5

Pr@10

0.0

(a) Precision@k

0.1

Re@1

Re@2

Re@5

Re@10

0.0

HR@1

(b) Recall@k

HR@2

HR@5

HR@10

(c) HitRate@k

Figure 3: [Best viewed in color] Hashtag recommendation accuracy of the 7 methods, evaluation with k = {1, 2, 5, 10}
ularly when k is greater than 1 on three evaluation matrices.
This suggests that similar Web pages are more reliable in recommending hashtags, and the domain of the hyperlink is indeed
an important piece of information for hashtag recommendation.
3. There is a large performance degradation for Pr@k when k =
5 or 10 because most tweets have fewer than 3 hashtags (see
Figure 2(c)). However, when k = 10, RankSVM++ achieves
Re@10 of 0.4 and HR@10 of 0.5.

Table 1: The 7 methods in evaluation
Method name
Description
SimilarTweet
Most frequently used hashtags in similar tweets
SimilarPage
Most frequently used hashtags in similar Web pages
DomainFreqTag
Most frequently used hashtags for the given domain
NamedEntity-RWR Hashtags selected by named entities using RWR
NamedEntity-LT Hashtags selected by named entities using LT
RankSVM
RankedSVM using the first set of 5 features
RankSVM++
RankedSVM using the all (two sets of) features

5.

SimilarTweet is similar to the method proposed in [5]. However,
because of the different approach adopted in collecting data, the
user information used in [5] cannot be adopted here. The last
two methods, i.e., RankSVM and RankSVM++ both realize the
proposed learning to rank framework with the only difference in
the set of features used. RankSVM uses 5 binary features where
each feature corresponds to a candidate hashtag selection scheme.
RankSVM++ uses all 9 binary features listed in Section 3.2. Both
methods were implemented using the liblinear library.6
To learn the RankSVM models, we randomly selected 15, 000
hyperlinked tweets from the first 40 days of the data to derive the
training instances. Another 7, 000 hyperlinked tweets randomly
selected from the remaining 20 days of the data are used as test
tweets. In candidate hashtag selection for both training and testing,
we limit the search for similar tweets (resp. Web pages) posted one
day before the currently processing tweet to simulate inaccessibility of future data in reality.

CONCLUSION

Hyperlinked tweets are relatively more informative than nonhyperlinked tweets. We show that the functions of hashtags can be
extended to the linked documents from hyperlinked tweets. To facilitate information sharing and organization, we propose to recommend hashtags to hyperlinked tweets. In our proposed solution, we
select candidate hashtags by exploiting the content of the tweets,
the linked documents, and the domain of the hyperlink. Using the
learning to rank models, we show that the aggregation and ranking
of candidate hashtags achieves promising hashtag recommendation
accuracy, evaluated by precision, recall, and hit rate.

6.

REFERENCES

[1] Z. Ding, X. Qiu, Q. Zhang, and X. Huang. Learning topical
translation model for microblog hashtag suggestion. In IJCAI, pages
2078–2084, 2013.
[2] Y. Duan, L. Jiang, T. Qin, M. Zhou, and H.-Y. Shum. An empirical
study on learning to rank of tweets. In COLING, pages 295–303,
2010.
[3] M. Hu, S. Liu, F. Wei, Y. Wu, J. Stasko, and K.-L. Ma. Breaking
news on twitter. In CHI, pages 2751–2754, 2012.
[4] H. Kwak, C. Lee, H. Park, and S. Moon. What is twitter, a social
network or a news media? In WWW, pages 591–600, 2010.
[5] S. M. Kywe, T.-A. Hoang, E.-P. Lim, and F. Zhu. On recommending
hashtags in twitter networks. In SocInfo, pages 337–350, 2012.
[6] T.-Y. Liu. Learning to rank for information retrieval. Found. Trends
Inf. Retr., 3(3):225–331, Mar. 2009.
[7] Z. Liu, X. Chen, and M. Sun. A simple word trigger method for
social tag suggestion. In EMNLP, pages 1577–1588, 2011.
[8] R. McCreadie and C. Macdonald. Relevance in microblogs:
Enhancing tweet retrieval using hyperlinked documents. In OAIR,
pages 189–196, 2013.
[9] J.-Y. Pan, H.-J. Yang, C. Faloutsos, and P. Duygulu. GCap:
Graph-based automatic image captioning. In CVPR Workshop, pages
146–154, 2004.
[10] D. M. Romero, B. Meeder, and J. Kleinberg. Differences in the
mechanics of information diffusion across topics: Idioms, political
hashtags, and complex contagion on twitter. In WWW, pages
695–704, 2011.
[11] B. Sigurbjörnsson and R. van Zwol. Flickr tag recommendation
based on collective knowledge. In WWW, pages 327–336, 2008.
[12] E. Zangerle, W. Gassler, and G. Specht. On the impact of text
similarity functions on hashtag recommendations in microblogging
environments. Social Netw. Analys. Mining, 3(4):889–898, 2013.
[13] X. Zhang, B. He, T. Luo, and B. Li. Query-biased learning to rank for
real-time twitter search. In CIKM, pages 1915–1919, 2012.

Evaluation Metric. We use three metric to evaluate hashtag recommendation accuracy: Precision@k, Recall@k, and HitRate@k
(Pr@k, Re@k, and HR@k for short); k={1, 2, 5, 10} is the number of top-ranked recommended hashtags. Let Hk be the set of
top-k recommended hashtags and Hg be the set of ground-truth
hashtags of a tweet t (likely 1 ≤ |Hg | ≤ 3). Pr@k for tweet t is
|Hk ∩ Hg |/k; Re@k for tweet t is |Hk ∩ Hg |/|Hg |; and HR@k for
t is 1 if |Hk ∩ Hg | ≥ 1 and 0 otherwise. The values reported for
each method are the averaged values over the 7, 000 test tweets.
Experimental Results. Figure 3 reports Pr@k, Re@k, and HR@k
of the five baseline methods and the two RankSVM methods for
k = {1, 2, 5, 10}. We make three observations from the results.
1. The two RankSVM methods outperform all the five baseline
methods on all three evaluation metrics for all k values. The
results clearly show the effectiveness of aggregating candidate
hashtags selected by exploiting multiple sources. When k = 1,
RankSVM is slightly better than RankSVM++ on all three metrics. However, RankSVM++ outperforms RankSVM when k is
greater than 2, suggesting the effectiveness of the 4 additional
features in the learning to rank model.
2. Among the five baseline methods, SimilarPage performs slightly
better than SimilarTweet, followed by DomainFreqTag, partic6 http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/~cjlin/liblinear/

834

