Computing and Applying Topic-level User
Interactions in Microblog Recommendation
Xiao Lu1,2, Peng Li3, Hongyuan Ma4, Shuxin Wang1,2, Anying Xu1,2, Bin Wang1
1. Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, P.R.China
2. University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, P.R.China
3. Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, P.R.China
4. CNCERT-CC, Beijing, P.R.China

luxiao@ict.ac.cn, lipeng@iie.ac.cn, mahongyuan@foxmail.com,
{wangshuxin, xuanying, wangbin}@ict.ac.cn
Recommendation techniques are recognized as effective way to
overcome this problem, especially social recommendation
methods which incorporate social relationship have been well
investigated.

ABSTRACT
With the development of microblog services, tens of thousands of
messages are produced every day and recommending useful
messages according to users’ interest is recognized as an effective
way to overcome the information overload problem. Collaborative
filtering which rooted from recommender system has been utilized
for microblog recommendation, where social relationship
information can help improve the recommendation performance.
However, most of existing methods only consider the static
relationship, i.e. the following relationship, which totally ignore
the relationship conveyed by users’ repost behaviors. To explore
the effects of behavior based relationship on recommendation, we
propose an Interaction Based Collaborative Filtering (IBCF)
approach. Specifically, we first use topic model to analyze users’
interactive behaviors and measure the topic-specific relationship
strength, then we incorporate the relationship factor into the
matrix factorization framework. Experimental results show that
compared to the current popular social recommendation methods,
IBCF can achieve better performance on the MAP and NDCG
evaluation measures, and have better interpretability for the
recommended results.

However, most existing works [1,2,3,4] usually utilize the
existence or strength of relationship, which could just verify how
users connect to their friends, but cannot explain why they build
that relationship. To address the problem, we present a new
approach to characterize users' relationship from latent topic
factors, by analyzing the textual content associated with each
interaction between users and their friends, and apply this
approach in microblog recommendation to improve the
performance.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
(1) Analyze the topic related factors of relationship from users'
interaction content, and propose a topic-level strength
measurement.
(2) Introduce time factor into interaction, and propose a time
decay interaction model to simulate the development of
relationship more effectively.
(3) Aggregate the topic related factors of relationship into
matrix factorization based recommendation model.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Information filtering

2. RELATED WORK

Keywords

Many social recommendation methods have been investigated.
Konstas et al. [1] proposed a random walk model RWR to
integrate friendship and social tags. Ma et al. [2] proposed two
social regularization methods which constrain the matrix
factorization objective function with user social regularization
terms. Based on the above work, Mohsen et al. [3] further

Interaction Relationship; Social Recommendation; Microblog
Recommendation

1. INTRODUCTION
With the development of social networks, microblog has
become one of the most popular Internet applications in recent
years, on which tens of thousands of messages are produced every
day, and lead to serious information overload problem.

proposed SocialMF model，which introduce the propagation of
user trust relationship, the feature vector of each user depends on
the feature vector of his direct neighbors.
These methods require using explicit relationship, which is not
always available. Therefore, many researcher have proposed
methods to measure possible relationship by using rating
information. Pitsilis et al. [5, 6] proposed trust measurement based
on the difference of user ratings. Donovan et al. [7] utilized the
ratio of correct rating to compute users’ trust. Lathia et al. [8]
extended this method by introducing penalty parameter.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR’14, July 6–11, 2014, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.
Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07 ...$15.00.

Although the aforementioned methods have moved a step
forward in the research of social recommendation, to the best of
our knowledge, there is no work about investigating topic-level
relationship in social recommendation. We believe that, for a user

http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2609455

843

Here, Di,j is the set of all microblogs which user i have reposted
from friend j.

u1 and his friend u2, he would not be interested in all messages
posted by u2, but just some certain topics. This could be observed
from actions of repost in microblog: Users always repost certain
topic-related microblogs from certain friends.

By this definition, the strength of relationship ri,j on different
topics would be different. This can be explained as: Users
establish a relationship with a friend, just because of some
specific interests, instead of all topics.

As shown in Figure 1, we extend common user relationship (a)
to topic-level user relationship (b), users would have different
relationship strength in different topics with a single friend.

3.3 Time Decay of Relationship
Each interaction has its time property, which reflects the
time-sensitive feature of relationship. We suppose that users tend
to trust friends who has interacted with him recently, then we
introduce a parameter β, to define the strength of
that decays with time:
∑

Figure 1: Topic-level relationship

,

3. OUR APPROACH

|

,

relationship

·

∑

(3)

|

As shown in Eq. (3), as time passed, each interaction will make
less impact on the strength of relationship, so as to strengthen the
relationship with those friends who have interacted with user in
more recent time.

3.1 Relationship’s Topic Representation
We utilize the textual content of interactions to represent users’
relationship, and apply Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) to label
relationship in multiple topics.

3.4 Final Recommendation Model: IBCF
To integrate the topic factor and strength factor, we propose a K
×K diagonal matrix, where each diagonal element represents the
strength of relationship on each topic. As shown in Eq. (4):
0

,
,

(4)

0

,

Then we could generate the weighed topic vector of relationship
by calculating

As shown in Figure 2, for relationship r1,2, topic distributionθ
~Dirichlet( α ), topic-specific relationship-word distribution φ

r

~Dirichlet(β), so as to decompose the latent factors of relationship
into a combination of latent factors of words:
∑

| |

(1)

Suppose microblog d is one of the interaction between user i
and j, and the distribution on topic tk is p(tk|d), then we compute
the strength of relationship ri,j on topic tk by aggregating all the
interaction microblogs, as shown in Eq. (2):
,

|
|

∈Rk.

,

r

b

b

p

∑

,

(5)

,

Table 1: User selection criteria

3.2 Topic-level Relationship Strength

∑

,

Datasets: We use the dataset given by Zhang et al. [11],
which is crawled from Sina Weibo, the most popular social
network website in China. We select some active users as our
experimental subjects, and the selection criteria are shown in Table
1:

In addition, because microblog messages are short texts, it is
often ineffective to directly use LDA model to calculate the
distribution of topics. Therefore, in our experiments, we apply
USER Scheme methods proposed by Hong et al. [9] to process
these interactions’ content.

∑

,

4.1 Experiment Settings

∈Rk is a k-dimension vector to represent the topic vector of ri,j.

,

, and

4. EXPERIMENTS

Here, W is the term set of the textual content of relationship ri,j,
,

,

After that, we propose our recommendation model IBCF
(Interaction-Based Collaborative Filtering), based on the
Regularized SVD [10] method, here we utilize the weighed topic
vector of relationship as latent factors of user:

Figure 2: Graphic model of relationship

,

,

(2)

844

followees

200~10000

followers

100~1000

co-followers

50~500

post records(including original and
forwards)
post records in crawled dataset

1000~10000
>0

Figure 3: IBCF performance compared with other methods
Following the criteria, we choose 538 users and 26271
followers dataset as our experimental dataset. Following the
experimental strategies used in [4, 12], we take the ratings ru,i as
binary value, repost as 1 rating, not-repost as 0 rating. For each
positive sample, we choose 4 not-repost messages as negative
samples.

recommendation. Experimental results show that our approach
IBCF could make a better performance comparing to typical
recommendation methods. This also validates the importance of
user interaction in social networks for interactive behavior could
reflect the common interests between users and friends more
accurately.

Then we split the dataset into training dataset, validation dataset
and test dataset based on timeline. For these selected 538 users, we
count each user’s post, and generate the split time point by ratio
1/5, then divide the post set of each user’s friends following this
time point. By doing this, we can take the sub-dataset before the
split time point as training dataset, and the sub-dataset after the
split time point as test dataset. In the same way, we can get the
validation dataset from training dataset.

Our future work include considering the cold start problem, for
user would not be able to interact with each of his friends. To
address this problem, we would like to integrate the social
relationship and interactions together to extend our approach.

6. REFERENCES

Baseline Methods: We compare our approach to several typical
methods, such as content-based LDA, item-based KNN,
state-of-the-art matrix factorization model RSVD, and social
recommendation model SocialMF. We user NDCG@n, P@n and
MAP to evaluate our approach.

[1]

Konstas, I., Stathopoulos, V., & Jose, J. M. (2009, July). On
social networks and collaborative recommendation. In
Proceedings of the 32nd international ACM SIGIR
conference on Research and development in information
retrieval (pp. 195-202). ACM.

[2]

Ma, H., Yang, H., Lyu, M. R., & King, I. (2008, October).
Sorec: social recommendation using probabilistic matrix
factorization. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on
Information and knowledge management (pp. 931-940).
ACM.

[3]

Jamali, M., & Ester, M. (2010, September). A matrix
factorization technique with trust propagation for
recommendation in social networks. In Proceedings of the
fourth ACM conference on Recommender systems (pp.
135-142). ACM.

[4]

Chen, K., Chen, T., Zheng, G., Jin, O., Yao, E., & Yu, Y.
(2012, August). Collaborative personalized tweet
recommendation. In Proceedings of the 35th international
ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in
information retrieval (pp. 661-670). ACM.

[5]

Pitsilis, G., & Marshall, L. F. (2004). A model of trust
derivation from evidence for use in recommendation
systems. University of Newcastle upon Tyne, Computing
Science.

[6]

Pitsilis, G., & Marshall, L. (2005). Trust as a key to
improving recommendation systems (pp. 210-223). Springer
Berlin Heidelberg.

4.2 Experiment Results
The experiment results are shown in Figure 3, on the left are the
performance on P@n and MAP, on the right are NDCG.
From the results, we can see that, the effect of Item-based KNN
is poor, the main reason may be the sparseness of microblogs’
rating. For most microblogs, they could only get few reposts,
which makes it difficult to calculate the similarity of items
accurately. Content-based recommendation method LDA make a
trifle improvement, which may be due to the contribution of topic.
RSVD could reach 0.3259 on MAP, while SocialMF could make a
better performance owing to the fusion of social relationship, its
MAP goes to 0.3973. By comparison, our approach IBCF could
achieve 0.4758, which gets 45.99% improvement compared with
RSVD, and 19.75% to SocialMF. And on NDCG, we could
observe the similar improvement given by IBCF.

5. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have conducted a study on users’ relationship
from topic-level interactions, proposed a new approach to measure
its strength, and applied this topic-level interaction into microblog

845

[7]

O'Donovan, J., & Smyth, B. (2005, January). Trust in
recommender systems. In Proceedings of the 10th
international conference on Intelligent user interfaces (pp.
167-174). ACM.

[8]

Lathia, N., Hailes, S., & Capra, L. (2008). Trust-based
collaborative filtering. In Trust Management II (pp.
119-134). Springer US.

[9]

[11] Zhang, J., Liu, B., Tang, J., Chen, T., & Li, J. (2013,
August). Social influence locality for modeling retweeting
behaviors. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Third international
joint conference on Artificial Intelligence (pp. 2761-2767).
AAAI Press.
[12] Yan, R., Lapata, M., & Li, X. (2012, July). Tweet
recommendation with graph co-ranking. In Proceedings of
the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Long Papers-Volume 1 (pp.
516-525). Association for Computational Linguistics.

Hong, L., & Davison, B. D. (2010, July). Empirical study of
topic modeling in twitter. In Proceedings of the First
Workshop on Social Media Analytics (pp. 80-88). ACM.

[10] Paterek, A. (2007, August). Improving regularized singular
value decomposition for collaborative filtering. In
Proceedings of KDD cup and workshop (Vol. 2007, pp. 5-8).

846

