The Role of Network Distance in LinkedIn People Search
Shih-Wen Huang

Daniel Tunkelang

Karrie Karahalios

Computer Science & Engineering
University of Washington

Query Understanding
LinkedIn

Computer Science
University of Illinois

wenhuang@cs.washington.edu

dtunkelang@linkedin.com

kkarahal@cs.uiuc.edu

ABSTRACT

from the users who performed people search on the web. These
results suggest that people searches vary based on their contexts,
and more studies are necessary to better understand and support
various online people search.

LinkedIn is the world's largest professional network, with over
300 million members. One of the primary activities on the site is
people search, for which LinkedIn members are both the users and
the corpus. This paper presents insights about people search
behavior on LinkedIn, based on a log analysis and a user study. In
particular, it examines the role that network distance plays in
name searches and non-name searches. For name searches, users
primarily click on only one of the results, and closer network
distance leads to higher click-through rates. In contrast, for nonname searches, users are more likely to click on multiple results
that are not in their existing connections, but with whom they
have shared connections. The results show that, while network
distance contributes significantly to LinkedIn search engagement
in general, its role varies dramatically depending on the type of
search query.

The online professional network is another context where people
search is used extensively. For instance, LinkedIn, which has
established itself as the largest professional network, has over 300
million members [7]. LinkedIn has reported that its members
performed over 5.7 billion searches on the platform in 2012 [7].
The emergence of LinkedIn and other professional networks has
given rise to a new class of search problems. Specifically, the
graph structure of professional networks allows the users search
for people with different network distances, which makes it
essentially different from people search on the web or in an
enterprise.
The people search systems in online social networks (e.g.,
LinkedIn and Facebook) mostly focus on supporting name search.
At LinkedIn, there is a very long tail of search queries, and the
largest class of queries is name queries [8]. In addition, previous
research [4] suggests it is difﬁcult to deliberately set out to
discover speciﬁc information from Facebook’s search and
browsing features — especially in the case where one searches for
an unknown person or expert. However, upon analysis of the
search log of LinkedIn people search, we found that when users
enter certain type of queries (e.g., Job Title), their intentions and
consequent actions are very different from those of name
searches. This suggests that the type of search performed on
LinkedIn is query dependent, and we need to rethink how to better
support these different types of search.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search
and Retrieval – search process, selection process

General Terms
Algorithms, Experimentation, Human Factors

Keywords
Social network, exploratory search, people search

1. INTRODUCTION

The rest of this paper focuses on understanding the differences
between how LinkedIn searchers behave in name searches and
non-name searches. We first present a log analysis of LinkedIn
people search that characterizes click behavior for different query
tags. We find that there are significant differences between the
click behaviors of name queries and non-name queries. Moreover,
we find that network distance plays a key role in influencing click
behavior, but that it acts differently for name and non-name
searches. We then present the results of a follow-up user study
that we conducted to better understand the intentions motivating
searchers to select a given search result. We conclude with the
discussion of the design implications of our research for
improving people search in the context of a professional network
like LinkedIn.

People search is one of the most popular types of online search. It
is estimated that about 11% to 17% of web queries contain a
person’s name. [5] Therefore, understanding how people search
for people is a critical issue in information retrieval.
People search has been studied in several different contexts.
Weerkamp et al. [5] analyzed the query log of a people search
engine on the web. They observed many differences between
people search and web document search (e.g., higher percentage
of one-query sessions and lower click-through rates). Also, Guy et
al. [3] presented a study of the people search application (Faces)
at IBM. They showed that the users behaved quite differently
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice
and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work
owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is
permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to
lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from
permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR’14, July 6–11, 2014, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07…$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2609461

2. LOG ANALYSIS
We analyzed the search logs of LinkedIn people searches
conducted from 6/19/2013 to 7/18/2013. The search log contains
millions of unique people searches. We automatically tagged each
query using a hidden Markov model that segmented the keywords
and tagged each segment as an entity type (e.g., First Name and
Company Name). For proprietary reasons, we could not discuss

867

Category

Query Tag

Percentage of
multiple-click
search

CTR on 1stdegree

CTR on 2nddegree

CTR on 3rddegree or
more

Connect rate after
click on 2nddegree

Connect rate
after click on 3rddegree or more

Non-name

Job Title

13.92

1 (normalizer)

2.08

1.57

2.68

0.36

Non-name

Skill

13.69

1 (normalizer)

1.68

1.37

2.40

0.27

Non-name

Company Name

8.01

1 (normalizer)

0.99

0.90

1.28

0.21

Name

Last Name

5.28

1 (normalizer)

0.75

0.51

1.41

0.50

Name

First Name

2.98

1 (normalizer)

0.49

0.43

1.21

0.33

Name

First Name, Last
Name

1 (normalizer)

1 (normalizer)

0.27

0.09

1.00 (normalizer)

0.55

Table 1. Summary of the search log of LinkedIn people search. All the numbers were normalized for proprietary reasons. Column 2
shows the top 6 most popular query tags in the search log. Column 3 shows the percentage of multiple-click search of the 6 query tags
(Normalized by the percentage of the query tagged as First Name, Last Name). Column 4, 5, and 6 display the CTR of search results
with different network distances (Normalized by CTR on 1st-degree results of each query tag). Column 7 and 8 show the fraction of
searches that lead to new connections after clicks on results. (Normalized by the connect rate of First Name, Last Name search after a
click)

We further analyzed whether the users who search for people
beyond their 1st-degree connections connect with them after the
searches. Our analysis found that the rate of building a new
connection (an invitation to connect that is accepted) dropped
when there were no shared connections between the user and their
search results. This pattern is especially strong for non-name
searches. The Chi-squared tests suggest that there are significant
differences between the connect rates after clicks on 2nd-degree
results and the connect rates after clicks on 3rd-degree results (p <
0.001).

the details of the tagger, but the internal human evaluation shows
that our tagger has a precision of over 90%, and over 99% for
identifying first and last names.
We first analyzed the percentage of the searches that resulted in
multiple clicks when at least one click is performed based on their
query tags (see Column 3 in Table 1). The results suggest that the
` sequence of tags describing a query was highly predictive of
whether a search would result in single click or multiple clicks.
Queries tagged as Job Title (e.g., “software engineer”) were about
14 times more likely to have multiple clicks than queries tagged
as First Name, Last Name. A Chi-squared test found that all the
difference between the groups was significant with p < 0.001.
This suggests that we can use the query tags to infer the intent of
the searchers. When users issue name queries (e.g., First Name,
Last Name), they are more likely to be interested in a single
target. Therefore, most of the times these searches result in only
one click. On the other hand, when users issue non-name queries
(e.g., Job Title and Skill), the users often want to explore the
results and click on more than one result.

We found that users who issue non-name queries were much more
likely to connect with the 2nd-degree results they clicked on than
those who issued name searches. But this pattern was reversed
when there was no shared connection: users who issued non-name
queries were much less likely than those who issued name queries
to connect to the 3rd-degree (or more distant) results they clicked
on.
In summary, our log analysis shows that query tags are highly
associated with the click behavior and connection rate for people
search results with different network distances. For name
searches, searchers often click on one result, and network distance
negatively correlates to both CTR and connection rate. Users who
search for non-name queries, however, are most interested in 2nddegree connections, as evidenced by both CTR and connection
rate.

To better understand the targets of the searches, we computed the
aggregated click-through rate (CTR) over search results, broken
down by the network distance between the searcher and person in
the search result.
We found the patterns were very different for searches with
different query tags. For name searches, 1st-degree connections
yield the highest CTR, and the CTR decreases as the network
distance increased. In contrast, for non-name searches, the CTR
for the results of 1st-degree connections is comparatively much
lower. For Title and Skill queries, the CTR for the results of 1stdegree connections are the lowest. The CTR is maximal for 2nddegree connections, and then drops for higher network distances –
but is still higher than or at least similar to the CTR for direct
connections. (see Columns 4, 5, and 6 in Table 1) The Chisquared tests show that all the differences of the CTR on results
with different network distances were statistically different (p <
0.001). These results suggest that, while name searches often
target people that are already in the searcher’s connections, nonname searches usually prefer results that are not in the searcher’s
existing connections. More specifically, non-name searches prefer
2nd-degree results – that is, the people with whom the searcher
shares connections.

3. USER STUDY
Our log analysis shows that the users who search for non-name
queries behave much differently from users who search for name
queries. Specifically, their click behaviors suggest they are
performing exploratory search [6]. This means they are not
searching for a specific target. Instead, they are exploring a set of
people search results with desired characteristics. This is
surprising because current people search systems focus on
supporting name searches with specific targets. To gain more
insight into how and why users conduct exploratory people search
on LinkedIn, we conducted a user study. We surveyed 20
LinkedIn members who had performed non-name searches on
LinkedIn. The participants were 60% male, and 65% were USbased. Their stated motives for using LinkedIn broke down as

868

3.2 Shared connections increase the chances
for users to connect with people

follows: 60% were recruiters looking for candidates, 25% were
job seekers looking for new career opportunities, and 15% of
them were sales representatives or consultants looking for clients.

Both our log analysis and our user study indicated that shared
connections lead searchers to make new connections after
exploratory searches.

We provided the participants with the following definition of an
exploratory search: “searching for people with some set of
characteristics, as opposed to searching for a specific person.” We
then asked them a set of questions that included the following:
•

How do you use LinkedIn for exploratory search?

•

When you perform exploratory searches, are you more
interested in finding people you already know, (1st
degree connections); people you don't know, but with
whom you share connections (2nd-degree connections);
or anyone, regardless of whether you know them or
share connections with them.

The user study found two strategies that searchers employed in
reaching out to 2nd-degree connections.
The first is to mention shared connections:
“I usually write something like: ‘Hi, I saw you also know X.
He worked with us as an intern last summer.’ This greatly
increases the response rate.” (P2, recruiter)
“Most of the time, people do not reply to people without
shared connections, so I seldom try to contact people in my
third degree connections.” (P11, job seeker)

We also asked participants about the actions they performed after
finding people through search, as well as the general strategies
they used to achieve their goals.

The second is to ask the shared connection for an introduction:
“When I find the people in the company that I’m interested in,
I will not contact them directly. I will first send a message to
one of our common friends for introducing us.” (P12, job
seeker)

3.1 Exploratory searchers target people that
are not their 1st-degree connections
The results of our log analysis suggest that in exploratory people
search, users are more interested in the results that are not their
direct connections. Our user study also supports this finding. Here
are some excerpts from participant responses:

“I feel like the most important thing for me to get a response
from my target is whether my friend is willing to introduce us
or not.” (P13, job seeker)
Searchers also said that common characteristics (e.g., education,
previous employment) also increase the likelihood of a positive
response:

“If the person is someone I know, I can send them email
directly and don’t need to use the search function at all.” (P9,
job seeker)
“The people in my first-degree connections are either the ones
that are already working in my company or those who didn’t
get [an] offer after the interview process, so I would not send
invitations to them.” (P2, recruiter)

“I would say the response rate for ordinary recruiters is just
around 20%. For alumni, the response rate will increase to
about 50%” (P16, job seeker)
“When I try to connect to someone, I will write in the message
that says: it’s weird that we haven’t met since we have so
much in common. Let’s connect!” (P19, recruiter)

“I am more interested in growing my network and finding

little gems who don't have many connections. It’s more likely
they've not already been contacted by my competitors.” (P6,
sales)

In sum, even though exploratory search users target people that
are not in their existing connections, they still rely on the shared
connections and other common characteristics to build up trust
between each other. Hence, they place the highest value on 2nddegree connections.

Exploratory searchers target people that are not in their existing
connections for two main reasons:
1.

Searchers contact people they already know (1st degree)
through other methods, e.g., phone, email, face-to-face
meeting.

2.

People they don’t know are more likely to be useful
toward satisfying the needs of an exploratory search,
e.g., finding candidates to fill a job position.

4. IMPLICATIONS
Our results have several design implications for people search in
online professional networks.
First, the ranking function in the people search system – and
perhaps the overall search experience – should adjust based on the
query type. Our analysis suggests that users who perform nonname searches prefer results that are not in their 1st-degree
connections, which is the opposite of what we see for name
searches. The search engine should assign a lower rank to 1stdegree connections for non-name searches. Since we also found
that the query tagger can be very accurate, we advocate an

These results suggest that exploratory people search on LinkedIn
allows people to locate and connect to people that are not in their
existing connections. These people can be more important for
their career, and usually are hard to connect through earlier
traditional methods (e.g., phone and email).

869

the weak tie hypothesis to see whether weak or strong ties can be
better bridges to reach out to their targets.

5. CONCLUSIONS

Figure 1. An interface prototype that lists all the common
characteristics between the users and their indirect ties.

In addition, our study shows that LinkedIn people search allows
searchers to engage their 2nd-degree connections directly. How
could the system better support the interactions between the
people who don’t know each other in the real world? And how
does this change the way people seek new career opportunities?
These questions represent opportunities for subsequent research,
and are compelling research directions in the areas of online social
and professional networking.

approach where the search engine adjusts the ranking model and
interface when it detects a different search intent.
In addition, the search interface should clearly show how the 2nddegree connections are related to the users. Since people use
shared connections and characteristics to build new connections,
providing this information when the users explore the results can
help them decide which results are most useful. The current
LinkedIn interface shows users their number of shared
connections. This abstract number, however, may not be detailed
enough for detailed exploration. Figure 1 shows an alternative
interface (based on a visualization from the LinkedIn profile page)
that presents more information about the common traits between
users.

6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank our survey participants for their insight
and time. In addition, we thank Igor Perisic, Pei-Fen Tu, Nikita
Spirin, and the LinkedIn Query Understanding Team and Search
Relevance Team for valuable feedback.

Moreover, our study also provides implications for social
networking research. In Granovetter’s seminal work on the
strength of weak ties [2], he showed that in face-to-face
environments people use their weak ties to connect to 2nd-degree
connections. These weak ties, which serve as bridges between
strongly connected groups, created the most opportunities for
social mobility. While more work is necessary to study the
parallels of Granovetter’s findings in online spaces, to date, our
findings confirm Granovetter’s work that people search various
opportunities through their 2nd-degree connections. Professional
online networks such as LinkedIn are changing the job search and
recruit landscape. Unlike in face-to-face job interaction, they
enable members to explicitly identify and access their 2nd-degree
connections without direct help from weak ties. Perhaps it is time
to create new tie theories for a world where people have richer
access to their extended professional networks.

7. REFERENCES
[1] Gilbert, E. and Karahalios, K. Predicting tie strength with
social media. ACM CHI'09 (2009), 211
[2] Granovetter, M.S. The strength of weak ties. American journal
of sociology, (1973), 1360–1380.
[3] Guy, Ido, Sigalit Ur, Inbal Ronen, Sara Weber, and Tolga Oral.
"Best faces forward: a large-scale study of people search in the
enterprise." In Proceedings of ACM CHI'12 (2012).
[4] Scale, Mark-Shane. "Facebook as a social search engine and
the implications for libraries in the twenty-first century." Library Hi Tech 26.4 (2008): 540-556.
[5] Weerkamp, Wouter, Richard Berendsen, Bogomil Kovachev,
Edgar Meij, Krisztian Balog, and Maarten de Rijke. "People
searching for people: Analysis of a people search engine log."
In Proceedings of ACM SIGIR'11 (2011).

Finally, the system should help the users to evaluate their chances
to get positive response by calculating the strength of the path to
the indirect ties. Previous research has shown that the strength of
direct ties [1] can be accurately predicted. However, calculating
the strength of indirect ties is more complicated than the strength
of direct ties. It involves at least three main aspects:
1.

The tie strength between the user and the user’s direct
tie which served as the bridge.

2.

The tie strength between the direct tie and the indirect
tie.

3.

The common characteristics between the user and the
indirect tie.

We found two key contributions in our study of people search on
LinkedIn. First, Our study suggests that search intention can be
detected using automatic query tagging. We found that users who
perform non-name searches on LinkedIn target their 2nd-degree
connections because they are unexplored, but still have the shared
connections increase their chances of making a new connection.
This is significantly different from the user behavior of searchers
who issue name queries, where both CTR and connection rates
drop as the network distance increases.

[6] White, R.W. and Roth, R.A. Exploratory Search: Beyond the
Query-Response Paradigm, (2009), 1–98.
[7] http://press.linkedin.com/about.
[8] https://www.linkedin.com/today/post/article/2013100713034450510-optimize-for-the-short-snout

Understanding how these three aspects contribute to the strength
of indirect ties allows us to find the best candidates and the
optimal path that can reach to them. This also lets us reexamine

870

