Examining Collaborative Query Reformulation: A Case of
Travel Information Searching
Abu Shamim Mohammad Arif, Jia Tina Du, Ivan Lee
School of Information Technology and Mathematical Sciences
University of South Australia, South Australia, Australia

shamimarif@yahoo.com, tina.du@unisa.edu.au, ivan.lee@unisa.edu.au
queries [2]. When information needs become complex and
exploratory, it might be in searchers’ best interests to
collaboratively explore the information space and participate in
shared learning [10]. For instance, healthcare providers tend to
collaboratively search for information to diagnose a patient’s
illness [9]. Therefore, although information seeking has been
traditionally studied as an individual search activity, collaborative
information seeking and query reformulation have attracted much
attention in recent years [1, 9, 11].

ABSTRACT
Users often reformulate or modify their queries when they engage
in searching information particularly when the search task is
complex and exploratory. This paper investigates query
reformulation behavior in collaborative tourism information
searching on the Web. A user study was conducted with 17 pairs
of participants and each pair worked as a team collaboratively on
an exploratory travel search task in two scenarios. We analyzed
users’ collaborative query (CQ) reformulation behavior in two
dimensions: firstly, CQ reformulation strategies; and secondly, the
effect of individual queries and chat logs on CQ reformulation.
The findings show that individual queries and chat logs were two
major sources of query terms in CQ reformulation. The statistical
results demonstrate the significant effect of individual queries on
CQ reformulation. We also found that five operations were
performed to reformulate the CQs, namely: addition, modification,
reordering, addition and modification, and addition and
reordering. These findings have implications for the design of
query suggestions that could be offered to users during searches
using collaborative search tools.

Complex and exploratory Web searches often involve iterative
interactions with retrieval systems. Query formulation and
reformulation are important topics not only in individual
exploratory searches but in collaborative searches which may
cover issues such as patterns of query reformulation [3] and the
reliable sources for query expansion. Understanding query
reformulation behavior and being able to accurately identify
reformulation queries have several beneﬁts. One of these beneﬁts
is learning from user behavior to better suggest automatic query
reﬁnements or query alterations. Another beneﬁt is that, if we are
able to accurately identify query reformulations, we will be in a
better position to evaluate the satisfaction of users with query
results. Identifying query terms for query reformulation can be
very useful in cases where the retrieved results are irrelevant to
users’ information needs. Successful assistance to query
reformulation must be designed based on the understanding of
users’ query behavior [3]. However, as a much more complex
form of exploratory search, collaborative web search has seldom
been the focus of query reformulation research.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Search process, Query
formulation

General Terms
Experimentation, Measurement

Previously learned queries and relevant documents have been
reused in new and similar search sessions to improve the overall
retrieval quality in collaborative information retrieval (IR) [1].
Reddy et al. [5] investigated the role of communication in
collaborative information searching, from the perspective that the
communication is necessary to establish common grounds among
members of the team. They found that users communicated their
plans, thoughts, and search queries through the chat functionality
of the retrieval system while seeking information. Furthermore the
communication (i.e. chat) function played a critical role in query
reformulation and in enhancing search results by enabling the
team members to share common views. A collaborative querying
system has been sketched [4] to show how communication and
prior queries help collaborators with query formulation and
reformulation. In [11], the authors identified that actions, such as
querying, saving, viewing, and chatting, seem more likely to be
the sources for new query terms in collaborative searches. They
observed that despite the dominance of traditional resources such
as previous search histories and relevant documents in query
reformulation, chat log is an important resource for new query
terms in the leisure (travel) task. Yet little is known about the
impact of individual queries and chat logs generated by team

Keywords
Collaborative search, Interactive IR, Query reformulation

1. INTRODUCTION
Web searching is a process of querying and reformulating queries
to satisfy certain information needs. Web searchers frequently
modify their queries to obtain better results and this process is
referred as query reformulation [3]. Typical searchers have little
tolerance for viewing low-ranked search results and they prefer to
reformulate the query rather than see the complete result lists [3].
Previous studies have shown that 52% of users reformulate their
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice
and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work
owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is
permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute
to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
SIGIR’14, July 6-11, 2014, Gold Coast, QLD, Australia.
Copyright 2014 ACM. 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07…$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2609463

875

members on collaborative query (CQ) reformulation in the
collaborative search process. In this study, we are particularly
interested in addressing the following two research questions:

studies [8]. Each team was asked to look for travel information for
preparing a travel plan including destination, accommodation,
attraction, transport, food and so on. The participants were asked
to collect as much relevant information as possible for planning
the trip.

RQ1: What are the strategies for CQ reformulation?
RQ2: What is the interplay between individual querying, chatting,
and CQ reformulation in collaborative Web searching?

2.3 Procedure
The study was conducted in a computer laboratory in the
university. As we aimed to simulate remotely-located (different
places) synchronous (real-time) collaboration, the participants
were placed in different places separated by a partition in the
laboratory so that they could not talk to each other directly or see
what the other person was doing. The team members could only
communicate with each other by sending instant text messages or
reading each other’s search histories. Each pair of participants
was firstly introduced to the study and both systems (i.e. ColTIS
and Tripadvisor.com). The participants in each pair then filled out
an entry questionnaire about their educational backgrounds and
experiences on Web searching, traveling, and collaborative work.
After that, they were asked to work together on the exploratory
search task which took around 30 minutes on average for each
search scenario. At the end of the search, each participant
completed a post-search questionnaire collecting information
about their satisfaction with the collaborative search systems. Both
the search logs and chat logs were stored in the database for
further analysis.

2. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
Based on the results of previous studies [6, 7] which examined
the characteristics and strategies of tourists’ collaborative search
behavior, we designed a collaborative information search interface
- Collaborative Tourism Information Search (ColTIS) - which
supports the searching for travel-related information in both
standalone (a single user) mode and collaborative mode (multiple
users).
ColTIS allows various numbers of users to perform collaborative
searching. It provides not only the features of stand-alone query
formulation (query composed by a single user), but also the CQ
formulation (query composed by more than one user). Of the
multiple windows in the interface, three relevant windows are
illustrated (Figure 1) and described in the present paper. Window
1 is a standalone search window and Window 2 is used for
collaborative searching. The query terms are forwarded to the
Google search engine and the search results are then displayed. A
Chat window (Window 3) facilitates real-time communication
between multiple users while searching for information. ColTIS
supports the function of text-based messaging among multiple
users.

2.4 Data Analysis
The objective of collaborative IR is to obtain relevant information
to the solution of a common goal. In such a process, forming
queries is a very important activity to meet every party’s interest.
This paper focuses only on the analysis of CQ reformulation
behavior involved in the collaborative search process. The data for
analysis included the search logs including individual queries and
CQs and users’ chat logs. Individual queries refer to those queries
composed by individual users using the standalone query window,
while CQs refer to the queries composed by both participants in a
pair using the collaborative query window. The data were
analyzed in two dimensions: i) finding out CQ reformulation
patterns and ii) identifying the contribution of individual queries
and chat logs to the CQ reformulation. We collected a total of 210
tourism-related individual queries and 140 CQs. Among 507 chat
log entries, 486 were considered to be valid and the rest were
either blank or meaningless. The summary of the data used in this
paper are shown in Table 1.

Figure 1. Collaborative tourism information searching
(ColTIS) interface.

2.1 Participants
A total of 34 staff and postgraduate students (17 males and 17
females) were recruited from a large university in Australia to
participate in the study. All of them had been searching the Web
for an average of 11.5 years. To facilitate collaborative search, all
the participants signed up as pairs (17 pairs in total) and the
members of each pair knew each other and had co-working
experience: they either did collaborative work or traveled together
before the study. We simulated remotely-located collaboration and
the participants in the team could communicate with each other by
sending instant text messages.

Table 1. Summary of data
Type of Data
Total valid individual queries
Total valid CQs
Total valid chat entries

No.
210
140
486

3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
3.1 Collaborative Querying Architecture

2.2 Search Task
A tourism-related exploratory Web search task with two different
scenarios was used in this study: in the first scenario, pairs of
participants were asked to search with ColTIS; and in the second
scenario, they were asked to conduct the same search using
Tripadvisor.com with Google Talk as the means of
communication. Searching on travel planning is believed to be a
common collaborative search task and similar types of exploratory
search tasks had been used in other collaborative Web search

The CQ formulation architecture (Figure 2) was drawn to illustrate
how a CQ is initiated, reformulated and executed. The figure
shows that a CQ is initiated by any of the collaborating team
members using Window 2 (in Figure 1) which is visible to all
members. The initiator or any other team member can add any
term(s) to the CQ, edit any term(s) of the CQ, or delete any
term(s) from this CQ. After the end of the modification, the CQ is

876

chat logs or their teammate’s chat logs to form a CQ. An example
is given below:
Chat log
I want to find the local culture in Pukhet (issued by User 13, Pair
7)
Collaborative query
Restaurant in Thailand (initiated by User 14, Pair 7)
Restaurant in Thailand, Pukhet (the term “Pukhet” is added by
User 13, Pair 7)
Here, the query term “Pukhet” came from the chat logs.
• Previous knowledge and experiences: The sources of these
terms originated in searchers’ experiences, retrieved relevant
results, preferences, or previous knowledge, which accounted for
23% of the total CQ reformulations. An example comes as
follows:
Collaborative queries
Food in Seattle (initiated by User 34, Pair 17)
Australian food in Seattle (the term “Australian” is added by User
33, Pair 17)
The term “Australian” was from neither individual queries nor
chat logs. It was derived from users’ preferences.

executed to retrieve the results which are similar in function to
traditional IR systems. If the results are not satisfactory, then the
users refine the CQ. This modification of the CQ is repeated until
users are satisfied with it or the retrieved results. This satisfaction
is defined as the agreement on CQ or on results retrieved by the
collaborators.

user 1
user 2

Collaborative Query
(CQ) Initiated by
One User and
Visible to All

.
.
user n

No

Individual
Queries
Issued by
Users

Edit/Modification
of CQ
Sources of
terms

End of Editing of
CQ?

Yes
Execution of the
CQ

No

Results Satisfactory?

Chat Logs
Generated
by Users

3.2.2 Operations Performed for Collaborative Query
Reformulation

Previous
Knowledge
and
Experience

It is interesting to note that the pairs of participants performed
several operations to reformulate CQs. These operations are
defined based on two consecutive CQs: CQi and CQi+1, where
CQi+1 is the query immediately following the query CQi in the
same session. The detailed descriptions of these operations are
provided below:
• Addition: CQi and CQi+1 contain at least one term in common
and CQi+1 contains more terms than CQi . Example: Food in Gold
Coast Australia (CQi) → Indian food in Gold Coast Australia
(CQi+1)
• Modification: CQi and CQi+1 contain at least one term in
common and at least one term of CQi has been modified /replaced.
Example: Parkview hotel in Melbourne (CQi) → Crown tower
hotel in Melbourne (CQi+1)
• Reordering: CQi and CQi+1 contain exactly the same terms but
the order of these terms may be different. Example: Machu pichu
hotel (CQi) → Hotel machu pichu (CQi+1)
• Addition and modification:
CQi and CQi+1 contain at least one term in common; CQi+1
contains more terms than CQi and at least one term of CQi has
been modified/replaced. Example: Restaurant in Sydney (CQi) →
Restaurant near hotel CBD Sydney (CQi+1)
• Addition and reordering: CQi and CQi+1 contain at least one
term in common; CQi+1 contains more terms than CQi and the
order of the terms in CQi+1 is different from CQi . Example: Gold
Coast flight from Adelaide (CQi) → Flight from Adelaide to Gold
Coast (CQi+1)

Yes
End of CQ

Figure 2. Flow of collaborative query reformulation.

3.2 Collaborative
Strategy

Query

Reformulation

In the process of formulating CQ, an obvious question may
emerge: which terms should be selected in the query formulation
and how does the CQ reformulation evolve? Our analysis shows
that, three main sources were employed by the team for the
selection of terms earmarked for 140 CQ formulation, including
individual queries (51%), chat logs (26%), and previous
knowledge and experiences (23%) (Table 2).
Table 2. Source of terms for collaborative query reformulation
Source term(s) for collaborative query
Individual queries
Chat logs
Previous knowledge and experiences
Total

Instances
72
36
32
140

%
51
26
23
100

3.2.1 Sources of Terms for Collaborative Queries
• Individual queries: It is evident that during CQ formulation, the
collaborating team members employed the terms from either their
own queries or their partner’s queries. These terms were used to
add to or replace any existing terms in CQ. Individual queries
were identified as the mostly used source for CQ reformulation.
Here is an example:
Individual query
Crown hotel Melbourne (issued by User 4, Pair 2)
Collaborative query
hotel in Melbourne (initiated by User 3, Pair 2)
Crown Towers hotel in Melbourne (modified by User 3, Pair 2)
Here, the query term “Crown” came from the individual query.
• Chat logs: Chat logs also contributed over a quarter to CQ
reformulation. The participants borrowed the terms from their own

Out of 140 CQs, 56 were initial CQs and the remaining 84 were
the outcomes of the CQ reformulation operation (Table 3).
Table 3. Operations performed during collaborative query
reformulation
Operation
Addition
Modification
Addition and reorder
Reorder
Addition and modification
Total

877

Number
51
17
12
3
1
84

%
61
20
14
4
1
100

It was observed that in most cases, the participants added query
terms to the previous CQ (61%) and modified the previous CQ
(20%) for reformulating the query.

4. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The goal of this study was to explore CQ reformulation behavior
in travel information search. Our study differs from previous work
[1, 4, 11] in that we investigated sources of terms for CQ
reformulation, operations used to reformulate CQs, and the impact
of individual queries and chat logs in reformulating CQs in the
collaborative Web search. Our results provide some evidence that
both individual queries and chat logs influence users’ CQ
reformulation. Self-generated individual queries seem more likely
to be the source for new query terms than those that are partnergenerated. The sources for CQ formulation such as chat logs and
previous experience and previous knowledge are also important
for new query terms. The findings have implications to support
users when they reformulating CQs in the collaborative searching.
For example, to minimize the efforts needed for CQ formulation,
we may be able to identify the similarity among the query terms
obtained from different sources. Currently we are working on
automatic extraction of query terms from individual queries and
chat logs for CQ reformulation.

3.2 Impact of Individual Queries and Chat
Logs on Collaborative Query Reformulation
In this section we report the results regarding the usage of
individual queries and chat logs during collaborative searching
and their influences on the formulation of CQs. We performed
significance tests to show the differences between individual
queries and chatting logs as sources of CQ reformulation. The
results show that during the collaborative search process, users
collaborated more through chat logs (486 instances, mean= 28.59,
SD = 12.31) than through queries (210 instances, mean= 12.35,
SD = 5.49). The usage of chatting is statistically more significant
than the usage of queries (p=.00005) collaboration (Table 4).
Table 4. Comparison between query and chat for
collaboration and CQ reformulation in collaborative
information searching

Collaboration
Collaborative
reformulation

query

Mean (SD)
Individual
Chat
Query
12.35(5.49)
28.59(12.31)

Statistical
Test

8.00(5.29)

p=0.206

5.14(3.00)

5. REFERENCES
[1] Hust, A., Klink, S., Junker, M., and Dengel, A. 2002. Query
reformulation in collaborative information retrieval. In
Proceedings of the International conference on Information
and Knowledge Sharing.
[2] Jansen, B. J., Spink, A., and Pedersen, J. 2005. A temporal
comparison of altavista web searching. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science and Technology,
56(6), 559–570.
[3] Jansen, B. J., Booth, D. L., and Spink, A. 2009. Patterns of
query reformulation during Web searching. Journal of
American Society of Information Science and Technology,
60(7), 1358-1371.
[4] Fu, L., Goh, D. H. L., Foo, S. S. B., and Supangat, Y. 2004.
Collaborative querying for enhanced information retrieval.
Springer Berlin, 378-388.
[5] Reddy, M. C., Jansen, B. J., and Krishnappa, R. 2008. The role
of communication in collaborative information searching. In
Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science
and Technology, 45(1), 1-10.
[6] Mohammad Arif, A. S., Du, J. T., and Lee, I. (in press).
Understanding tourists’ collaborative information retrieval
behavior to inform design. Journal of the Association for
Information Science and Technology.
[7] Mohammad Arif, A. S., Du, J. T., and Lee, I. 2013. Exploring
tourists’ collaborative Web search: Implications for system
design. In Proceedings of the Australasian Web Conference
(AWC2013) pages 49-58.
[8] Morris, M. R. 2008. A survey of collaborative web search
practices. In Proceedings of ACM SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 1657–1660.
[9] Hansen, P. and Jarvelin, K. 2005. Collaborative information
retrieval in an information-intensive domain. Information
Processing & Management, 41(5), 1101-1119.
[10] White, R. W. and Roth, R. A. 2009. Exploratory search:
Beyond the query-response paradigm. Synthesis Lectures on
Information Concepts, Retrieval, and Services, 1(1), 1-9.
[11] Yue, Z., Jiang, J., Han, S., and He, D. 2012. Where do the
query terms come from?: An analysis of query reformulation
in collaborative web search. In Proceedings of the 21st ACM
International Conference on Information and Knowledge
Management (CIKM), pages 2595-2598.

p=0.00005

However, when comparing the usage of individual queries and
chat logs as the source of query terms, the statistical test (Table 4
Row 4) indicates that individual query is not significantly different
from chat logs in terms of formulating CQ (p=0.206).
The individual queries which contributed to the CQ reformulation
were further divided into two types: self-generated queries and
partner’s queries, and the chat logs used for CQ reformulation
were also classified into two categories: self-generated chat logs
and partners’ chat logs. As we further analyzed self-generated and
partners query transactions and chat logs (Table 5), we found that
self-generated query terms differ significantly from self-generated
chat logs (p = 0.0054). This suggests that as a resource of CQ, the
participants reused more query terms they had used before than
their own chat logs. However, there is no statistical difference
between partners’ queries and partners’ chat logs (p = 0.0909)
with respect to CQ formulation. This may suggest that the query
terms in partners’ query histories and partners’ chat histories are
equally important for the CQ (re)formulation.
Table 5. Comparison of self-query versus self-chat and
partners-query versus partners-chat as the source for
collaborative query

Self
Partner

Mean (SD)
Query
Chat
2.50(1.41)
1.30(0.48)
2.28(1.13)
1.64(0.74)

Statistical
Test
p=0.0054
p=0.0909

In summary, collaborators pose individual queries and chats with
teammate as they conduct collaborative searching on the Web.
These individual queries and chat logs influence users’
collaborative query reformulation, adoption of search strategies,
and results evaluation. The evaluation of search results might
further lead to the reformulation of CQ during the collaborative
searching.

878

