Discovering Real-World Use Cases for a
Multimodal Math Search Interface
Keita Del Valle Wangari

Richard Zanibbi

Rochester Institute of Technology
152 Lomb Memorial Drive
Rochester, NY 14623
+1 951-963-4780

Rochester Institute of Technology
102 Lomb Memorial Drive
Rochester, NY 14623
+1 585-475-5023

keita@thinkHCI.com

rlaz@cs.rit.edu

Anurag Agarwal
Rochester Institute of Technology
85 Lomb Memorial Drive
Rochester, NY 14623
+1 585-475-7531

axasma@rit.edu

equation editor. If users are visualizing a formally notated math
expression before they search, it seems unfortunate to break this
visual flow by forcing users to first convert the diagrammatic
math expression into a coded, sentential one or build it through
the tedious use of selection menus in order to initiate the search
process. Further, since many math expressions are learned,
consumed and recalled visually, being able to query using
expressions (i.e., query-by-expression) seems a natural way for
non-experts to search for mathematical information [12].

ABSTRACT
To use math expressions in search, current search engines require
knowing expression names or using a structure editor or string
encoding (e.g., LaTeX). For mathematical non-experts, this can
lead to an “intention gap” between the query they wish to express
and what the interface will allow them to express. min is a search
interface that supports drawing expressions on a canvas using
mouse/touch, keyboard and images. We present a user study
examining whether min changes search behavior for mathematical
non-experts, and to identify real-world usage scenarios for
multimodal math search interfaces. Participants found query-byexpression using hand-drawn input useful, and identified
scenarios in which they would like to use systems like min such as
for locating, editing and sharing complex expressions (e.g., with
many Greek letters), and working on complex math problems.

In a prior study of math professors and graduate students,
participants could not identify scenarios where entering math
expressions as search terms would be useful [14], and found it
sufficient to lookup formulas, metrics and concepts textually, as
they often knew them by name. However, the study did not
consider non-experts, and participants were not provided with a
prototype supporting non-textual math input for evaluation.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3. [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search
and Retrieval – Query formulation, Search process; H.5.2.
[Information Interfaces and Presentation]: User Interfaces –
User-centered design.

Keywords
User interface design; multimodal input; search interfaces;
Mathematical Information Retrieval; MIR; query-by-expression.

1. INTRODUCTION

Figure 1: A query combining a handwritten expression and
keywords in min1. Different search engines may be selected
from a drop-down menu (visible at top right).

Our study was designed to gain insight into whether expressions
would be desirable and/or useful to non-experts (in our case,
college students) when conducting math-related searches. We
looked at relevant research in the areas of visual math perception
and math input to understand the mental model and input
preferences of math searchers and then surveyed the current state
of math search interfaces to discover whether there are usability
issues that might specifically impact the non-expert user.

In contrast, for our study, non-expert participants used the math
search interface min (see Figure 1 [6]). min supports drawing
expressions as opposed to entering them textually or using
template editors (e.g., Microsoft Equation Editor). The goals of
our user study were: 1) to observe whether min changes user
search behavior, and 2) document relevant use cases for math
search interfaces by mathematical non-experts. Changes in user
behavior included increased use of math expressions in search,
and an increased capacity for some participants to represent
expressions for search, and a number of realistic use cases were
identified. We believe that our findings can inform the design of
math search interfaces so that they better support mathematical
non-experts.

What we found is that current math search interfaces limit users to
expressing the math expression portion of their search need in the
form of text, an encoding language, or via the use of some type of
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned
by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from
Permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR '14, July 06 - 11 2014, Gold Coast , QLD, Australia
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07…$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2609481

2. RELATED WORK
The appearance of math expressions affects our reasoning about
them [6]. Landy & Goldstone ran a series of experiments where
1

947

http://saskatoon.cs.rit.edu/min_instructions

participants were asked to judge whether given equations were
valid. Equations were structured with either nonstandard spatial
relationships, irrelevant or induced groupings, or manipulated
spacing. This influenced participant responses even when given
feedback, and when they recognized that they were likely being
misled by their perceptions.

displayed on the canvas. Tools are provided for correction and
manipulation including symbol selection, stroke selection,
undo/redo, and optical character recognition (OCR) correction.
Once the user is satisfied, they may submit the expression along
with keywords to various search engines. min converts the
expression into LaTeX, and then combines it with the keywords
into a query string that can then be sent to various math-aware
search engines that support LaTeX input.

In another set of experiments, participants were presented with
equations expressed textually, and asked to either handwrite or
type them into an interactive website using a keyboard [5].
Participants systematically spaced the expressions even when it
was unnecessary. Landy & Goldstone suggest that math notation
may be grounded in visual structure, since people seem to be
affected by small changes in symbol layout.

3. METHODOLOGY
Participants. The 16 participants were 18 or older, currently
enrolled in a first- or second-year college math course, self-rated
as Beginner or Intermediate level in math knowledge, and selfrated as Comfortable or Very Comfortable using the internet.
“Beginner” was defined as having knowledge consistent with
Basic Math and Pre-Algebra concepts. “Intermediate” was defined
as having knowledge consistent with Geometry, Algebra and PreCalculus concepts. Participants were recruited via email. Target
recipients were current Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT)
students in the College of Science, which contains the math
department, and the College of Computing and Information
Sciences.

Typed input has been found not to be ideal for authoring math
notation by many users [2]; equation editors fall short as searching
for symbols is tedious and making changes in symbol layout can
be difficult [11]. In an initial study, users asked to use and rate
various input modalities for math, found handwriting to be the
most natural and satisfactory [2]. Later, these results were found
to generalize to middle- and high-schoolers and to simpler, easily
typed equations [1].

Environment. The study was conducted in RIT’s Usability Lab.
The room was equipped with a desktop PC with a webcam, and a
speakerphone connected to the observation room. The observation
room was equipped with a desktop PC. Background information
and post-study ratings were collected from each participant via
online surveys. A moderator in the test room took notes during
each session. For 14 of the 16 sessions, an observer in the
observation room marked session recordings with task times and
noted interesting participant comments and actions; for the 2
moderator-only sessions, task times were marked later.

If users have a math expression in mind, it may be disruptive for
them to convert it into code or text to initiate the search process.
This gap between a user’s intentions and a system’s allowable
actions is known as the Gulf of Execution [9]. The point at which
a user is unable to precisely express their search intent as a
keyword query has been termed the “intention gap” [13]. We feel
this intention gap is present in major text-based search engines
like Google and in math search interfaces such as Wolfram Alpha,
NIST Digital Library of Mathematical Functions, as well as in
more recently developed math search engines like EgoMath [7]
and WikiMirs [3], both of which enable math search for
Wikipedia.

Tasks. The math topics and expressions used in the tasks were
selected based on the recommendations of the third author, a math
professor who advised that they were consistent with information
needs that students confront in freshman or sophomore college
math courses. Each task intentionally included both keywords and
math expressions to allow us to observe which one participants
preferred to use in their searches. The tasks were written in peerassist style, where participants imagine they are assisting a
classmate, to reduce anxiety participants might experience by
feeling their knowledge of math is being tested.

EgoMath, whose interface accepts math expressions in TeX
format, text or both adapts keyword search for math. Keywords
have sufficient semantics for search engines to provide users with
a relevant and sensibly ranked results list but, on their own, math
symbols do not as they usually derive meaning from how they are
organized structurally in a math expression [4]. WikiMirs, whose
interface accepts LaTeX input, is designed to look for textual and
spatial similarities between the user’s search query and the
indexed information. Both EgoMath and WikiMirs require the
searcher to know an encoding language and demonstrate the
sentential form of input where support for the diagrammatic
aspects of complex math expressions is missing.

Task 1: Your classmate is having difficulty recognizing
polynomials. Find one or more resources to help explain to your
classmate why
not a polynomial.

The Math-Aware Search Engine (MASE) [8] is another recently
developed math search engine. It is designed to support math
question and answering (Q&A) systems and its interface allows
users to input text and math expression queries using the equation
editor CODECOGS as a front-end. While equation editors do lend
support for the two-dimensional, spatial aspect of complex math
expressions, building and modifying the expression can be
tedious, as discussed earlier. Given the strong visual-spatial aspect
of math notation and its impact on reasoning, and given the
benefits of and preference for handwriting as a means of inputting
math on a computer, it appears the current search interfaces may
not provide the best user experience, particularly for non-experts,
when searching for math-related information.

is a polynomial and why

is

Task 2: Your classmate has heard of Pascal’s triangle but doesn’t
understand how it relates to math. Find one or more resources to
help explain to your classmate how the equation
relates to Pascal’s Triangle.
Task 3: Your classmate is struggling with binomial coefficients.
Find one or more resources to help explain to your classmate how
to find the value of

.

Task 4: Your classmate is having trouble understanding the prime
counting function. Find resources that help explain why
.

min [10] is a search interface that allows users to draw expressions
on a canvas (see Figure 1). The system is multimodal, also
accepting keyboard and image input. Recognition of user input is

Search Tool Conditions. Participants were asked to bring
textbooks, class materials or notes from their current math class so
math search behaviors that are tool-independent could be

948

observing the on-screen videos collected during the study,
participants spent a significant amount of time correcting symbol
and layout recognition errors. In some cases participants appeared
to be confused about the state of the recognized expression, and
would start entering the expression again, or require assistance
from the moderator.

identified. Participants were randomly assigned into four groups.
The tasks were presented in a different order to each group
allowing each task an equal opportunity to be first and to be
presented uniformly across the search conditions. The four search
conditions were presented to all participants in a fixed order: 1)
using their choice of text books, notes, websites, and/or online
search, 2) online search without the min interface, 3) online search
using only min, and 4) online search with the option of using min.

Table 1: Task time by search tool condition (in seconds)

Between the 2nd and 3rd conditions, participants were shown the
min interface, asked brief questions to obtain their initial
impressions, and then given a five-minute demonstration. The
input modalities available and demonstrated were handwritten
input on the canvas with a mouse, keyboard input on the canvas
and keyboard input into the search box.

Mean (μ)

Stdev (σ)

147.40

88.87

118.87

62.80

Cond 3 (min), n=16

315.19

239.80

Cond 4 (choice), n = 16
(online/ min), n=11
Participants using the min canvas

251.00

168.23

51.80

17.69

Cond 1 (free), n=15
(n<16 due to a system crash)

Cond 2 (online), n=15
(n<16 due to a system crash)

Post-study interview. Participants rated their experience via an
online survey, were interviewed about the session by the
moderator, and then paid $20 for their time.

4. RESULTS
In Search Condition 1, 14 participants used online search and 2
used their textbook. In Search Condition 4, 11 participants used
min canvas and 5 participants chose instead to use online search
with a web browser or min’s text search.

(online/ min), n=5

Participants not using the min canvas

Average task times for Tasks 2 and 3 are helpful for
understanding where min is useful and where it can be improved.
The largest increase in average task time occurred for the Pascal’s
Triangle task (Task 2), whose expression contained several terms
and had the most superscripts in the study. It averaged 134.86
seconds (σ ± 74.25) across both non- min conditions and jumped to
an average of 461 seconds (σ ±273.28) across both min conditions.
In contrast, the Binomial Coefficient task (Task 3) whose
expression has a smaller number of terms and a relatively simple
visual layout, averaged 121.57 seconds (σ ± 71.28) across both
non- min conditions and increased to an average of 134.29 (σ ±
45.05) seconds across both min conditions. Note the standard
deviations which are lower relative to the same conditions in Task
3 and comparable to non- min conditions.

None of the participants were observed using math encoding
languages (e.g., LaTeX) or template editors for expressing their
math search need although a few claimed to be familiar with
them. Admittedly, the structure of the expressions in 3 of the 4
tasks did not require any special encoding in order to be entered
into a standard search engine text box. But for the one task that
did, the Binomial Coefficient task containing the expression “4
choose 2”, most participants not only did not attempt to use any
special encoding languages, but many were not familiar with how
to say the expression in words. They recognized it visually but
beyond that, were unclear how to express it in sentential form –
the only form afforded by the conventional search text box.
The biggest behavior change noted in participants using the min
interface was the large increase in the use of expressions in their
search query. In Search Condition 1, 2 of the 14 participants who
chose online search used an expression in their initial query and in
Search Condition 2 none of the 16 participants did. However,
when required to use min for the first time in Search Condition 3,
all 16 participants used an expression. In Search Condition 4,
where min was optional, 10 of the 11 participants that chose to
interact with the min canvas used an expression in their initial
query.

In post-study, Likert-scale surveys, 11 out of 16 of participants
(69%) agreed or strongly agreed that min made it easy to enter
mathematical expressions, that min is a valuable tool, and that they
would use min frequently when working on a math problem. 13
out of 16 (81%) agreed or strongly agreed that being able to
search using mathematical expressions made it easier to find what
they needed. For example, although the expression in the
Binomial Coefficient task has a simple visual layout, several
participants had difficulty expressing it verbally and textually.
Participant quote: “Like 4 choose 2 – that’s really hard to ‘write’
but it knew what I meant and it accurately translated what I was
trying to say to it.”

Participants were asked to rate themselves as Successful,
Somewhat Successful, or Not Successful for each task. There was
little difference between non- min conditions (27 Successful) and
min conditions (25 Successful).

In post-study interviews, 12 out of 16 of participants (75%)
identified scenarios where they would use min or could have used
min in the past. This included studying for math tests (in particular,
working with Calculus, integrals, complex math problems and
expressions with lots of Greek letters), taking notes, collaborating
with remote students on assignments, and exporting expressions
as image files or LaTeX for use in reports. Also, even though the
“upload image” functionality of min was not demonstrated, several
participants expressed really liking that feature, as well as
suggesting real-world usage scenarios where they could imagine
using that function of min for distance collaboration on math
equations or sharing notes in class.

There was a noticeable increase in average task time when
participants used min (see Table 1). Across all tasks, task time for
each non- min condition (Conditions 1 and 2) averaged roughly 2
to 2 ½ minutes. However, when required to only use min in Search
Condition 3, average task time across all tasks jumped to an
average of over five minutes (note the high standard deviation of
239.8 seconds). In Condition 4 where min was optional and
participants were using it for the second time, task time averaged
over 4 minutes – still about twice as long as the non- min
conditions, with the standard deviation being almost double, as
well. When we break task time down by task, we still find that the
average task time was almost always higher using min. From

949

Finally, as most participants found query-by-expression through
drawing valuable, search interfaces supporting handwritten entry
for other diagram types (e.g., chemical diagrams) are worth
exploring in the future.

5. DISCUSSION
We feel that that the increased usages of expressions in queries
for Search Conditions 3 and 4 can be attributed to three things:
1. Affordance of the interface. The min interface is designed
with a large open, blank area with several tools located
horizontally across the top. Upon viewing the interface for
the first time, without using it or knowing its function,
several participants mentioned how similar in appearance it
was to a smartboard. When asked what the purpose of the
interface was, the majority said “drawing.”

7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This material is based upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation under Grant No. IIS-1016815. Also, we give
many thanks to Awelemdy Orakwue for assisting with this study.

8. REFERENCES
[1] Anthony, L., Yang, J. & Koedinger, K. R. Adapting
handwriting recognition for applications in algebra learning,
Proc. Int’l Work. Educational Multimedia & Multimedia
Education (Emme’07), (2007), 47-56.

2. Novelty of the interface. When provided with a demo of the
interface, several participants showed visible and audible
signs of being fascinated and impressed and seemed eager to
try it themselves. In the post-study interview, about a quarter
of the participants who chose drawing over typing cited “new
and intriguing” as being their reason for making that choice.

[2] Anthony, L., Yang, J., and Koedinger, K. R. Evaluation of
multimodal input for entering mathematical equations on the
computer, Proc. SIGCHI (CHI’05), (2005), 1184-1187.

3. Bridging the “intention gap”. Although participants may
have chosen to draw their expressions on the min canvas
because the open space was inviting and because the
functionality was new and intriguing, the Binomial
Coefficient task contained an expression that was difficult to
enter correctly in a standard text search box. In the poststudy interview, a few of the participants expressed not
knowing how they would have entered it in a text search.

[3] Hu, X., Gao, L., Lin, X., Tang, Z., Lin, X., & Baker, J. Proc.
of Joint Conference on Digital Libraries (2013), 11-20.
[4] Kamali, S., & Tompa, F. Retrieving documents with
mathematical content. Proc. ACM SIGIR, (2013), 353-362.
[5] Landy, D., & Goldstone, R. Formal notations are diagrams:
Evidence from a production task, Memory & Cognition 35, 8
(2007), 2033-2040.

The most surprising result was that participants found query-byexpression useful and identified real-world usage scenarios
despite increased task time and little difference in task success
when using min. Again, this finding may be attributed to the
possibility that min helps to bridge the query “intention gap” for
non-experts, allowing them to search for expressions as they
appeared in the task descriptions. We feel this should motivate
developers working on query-by-expression technology to
continue their work as it seems query-by-expression may be a
missing piece that closes the intention gap in existing math search
interfaces.

[6] Landy, D., & Goldstone, R. How abstract is symbolic
thought?, J. Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition 33, 4 (2007), 720-733.
[7] Misutka, J., & Galambos, L. System Description: EgoMath2
as a Tool for Mathematical Searching on Wikipedia.org, Int.
Computer Mathematics, LNCS Vol. 6824 (2011), 307-309.
[8] Nguyen, T., Chang, K., & Hui, S. C. A math-aware search
engine for math question answering system, Proc. ACM
CIKM, (2012), 724-733.
[9] Norman, D. User Centered System Design: New
Perspectives on Human-computer Interaction. L. Erlbaum
Associates Inc., Hillsdale, NJ, USA, 1986.

6. CONCLUSION
We have presented a first study of math search behavior in math
non-experts. This study was designed to target the non-expert
math searcher as the feeling was that this is not a population
familiar with LaTeX or other textual encoding languages, nor with
template editors and expression names. Our observations support
that view. In our study, search time, expression use, user
confidence, user comfort, and user satisfaction were all impacted
by introducing the ability to draw expressions in addition to using
keywords for search. Participants also indicated that such
technology would be useful to them.

[10] Sasarak, C., Hart, K., Pospesel, R., Stalnaker, D, Hu, L.,
LiVolsi, R., Zhu, S., & Zanibbi, R. min: A multimodal web
interface for math search, Symp. HCI and IR (HCIR),
Cambridge, MA (online), (2012).
[11] Smithies, S. Novins, K., & Arvo, J. Equation Entry and
Editing via Handwriting and Gesture Recognition, Behavior
and Information Technology 20, 1 (2001), 53-67.
[12] Zanibbi, R. & Blostein, D. Recognition and Retrieval of
Mathematical Expressions. Int'l. Journal on Document
Analysis and Recognition 15, 4 (2012), 331-357.

We believe that improving the recognition algorithms and results
visualizations used in min can substantially reduce the increased
entry times seen in our experiment. Based on study videos and
questionnaires, improvements to min have already been made that
may reduce the observed increases in search task completion time
when using min vs. text-based search. For example, we now allow
operator shorthands (e.g. ‘^’ for exponents) in text typed directly
on the canvas, which are then rendered. Both text and handwritten
symbols on the canvas are now rendered into a ‘clean’ expression
using MathJax to produce a simpler and more visually pleasing
symbol layout. Handwritten strokes are hidden after recognition to
address participant comments about visual clutter in the interface.

[13] Zha, Z.J., Yang, L., Mei, T., Wang, M., Wang, Z., Chua,
T.S., & Hua, X.S. Visual query suggestion: Towards
capturing user intent in internet image search, ACM Trans.
TOMCCAP 6, 3 (2010).
[14] Zhao, J., Kan, M., & Theng, Y. Math Information Retrieval:
user requirements and prototype implementation, Proc. Joint
Conference on Digital Libraries, (2008), 187-196.

950

