User Geospatial Context for Music Recommendation in
Microblogs
Markus Schedl

Andreu Vall

Katayoun Farrahi

Department of Computational
Perception
Johannes Kepler University
Linz, Austria

Department of Computational
Perception
Johannes Kepler University
Linz, Austria

Department of Computing
Goldsmiths, University of
London, UK

markus.schedl@jku.at

andreu.vall@jku.at

ABSTRACT

fields [6]. Such contextual aspects include time, location,
activity, weather, mood, or people with whom the listener
is currently together [11]. Given today’s availability of (mobile) devices that are equipped with sensors, it becomes feasible to gather corresponding data on a large scale.
In recent work, it has been shown that incorporating information about a listener’s position may help improve music
recommendation [12]. However, Schedl and Schnitzer follow
a simplistic approach to model a user’s position, by computing the centroid of the GPS coordinates of listening events.
In particular for users whose geospatial listening distribution is centered around more than one location this model
is problematic as the centroid will likely correspond to a location that is not representative for the user’s main places
of music consumption.
Addressing this shortcoming, we propose here two locationbased approaches to derive similarities between users from
GPS coordinates in microblog data about music listening,
and we combine these similarities with user-based collaborative filtering for the task of music recommendation. The
user context in our work is hence addressed by taking into
account musical preference and geospatial data, using a standardized collection of listening behavior mined from microblog data [4]. Our contextual similarity models either
represent the listeners’ location by modeling the distribution of her GPS coordinates via Gaussian mixture models
(the corresponding model is further called GEO) or by assigning political or cultural regions to the user (CULT).
In the remainder of the paper we first discuss related work
(Section 2), outline the dataset used (Section 3), and present
the proposed music recommendation models (Section 4).
Subsequently, we detail the setup of the experiments and
discuss results (Section 5). Conclusions and possible extensions round off this paper (Section 6).

Music information retrieval and music recommendation are
seeing a paradigm shift towards methods that incorporate
user context aspects. However, structured experiments on a
standardized music dataset to investigate the effects of doing
so are scarce. In this paper, we compare performance of various combinations of collaborative filtering and geospatial as
well as cultural user models for the task of music recommendation. To this end, we propose a geospatial model that uses
GPS coordinates and a cultural model that uses semantic locations (continent, country, and state of the user). We conduct experiments on a novel standardized music collection,
the “Million Musical Tweets Dataset” of listening events extracted from microblogs. Overall, we find that modeling listeners’ location via Gaussian mixture models and computing
similarities from these outperforms both cultural user models and collaborative filtering.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
Information systems [Information retrieval]: Music recommendation; Human-centered computing [Collaborative
and social computing]: Social media

General Terms
Algorithms, Evaluation

Keywords
Music Information Retrieval; Music Recommendation; User
Geospatial Context; Personalization; Evaluation

1.

k.farrahi@gold.ac.uk

INTRODUCTION

Accounting for contextual aspects of the listener in music retrieval and recommendation systems has recently been
identified as one of the most important challenges in these

2. RELATED WORK
Literature on location-based music recommendation is relatively sparse. This can be explained by the fact that geospatially annotated music listening data is barely publicly available for academic research, exceptions being the recently
published datasets “MusicMicro” [10] and “Million Musical
Tweets Dataset” [4]. Among the few works, Park et al. [7]
use geospatial data to recommend music that matches a selected environment, based on aspects such as ambient noise,
surrounding, or traffic. Kaminskas et al. [5] propose various
approaches (exploiting a knowledge base, human annota-

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR’14, July 6–11, 2014, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07 ...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2609491 .

987

Level
Users
Artists
Tracks
Continents
Countries
States

Amount
27,778
21,397
108,676
7
166
871

Min.
5
1
1
9
1
1

1st Qu.
7
1
1
4,506
12
7

Median
10
2
1
101,400
71
40

Mean
27.69
35.95
7.08
109,900.00
4,633.00
814.60

3rd Qu.
17
9
4
142,200
555
194

Max.
89,320
11,850
2,753
374,300
151,600
148,900

Table 1: Dataset statistics.
tions, and annotations automatically predicted from audio
signals) to recommend music for a given point of interest,
such as a particular monument. Byklum [2] explore the use
of song lyrics to link music to cities and countries. Raimond et al. [8] combine information from different sources
to derive geospatial information on artists, aiming at locating them on a map. Perhaps closest to the work at hand
is [12], in which Schedl and Schnitzer incorporate position
information from GPS coordinates into a music recommendation model. Their model is, however, not suited to deal
with users having several geographical clusters of listening
activity. Furthermore, the authors only consider user distance based on pure GPS coordinates, ignoring cultural or
political regions, which may better reflect differences in music preference1 .
From a higher point of view, this work relates to contextbased and hybrid recommendation systems, a detailed review of which is unfortunately beyond the scope of the paper. A decent literature overview and comprehensive discussion are given in [9].

3.

ferent artists. Furthermore, we map GPS coordinates to
semantic locations, such as continent, country, or state, to
allow for cultural user modeling. In this way, we obtain a
subset of the MMTD set with basic statistics shown in Table 1. The second column shows the total amount of the entities in the corresponding first row, whereas the right-most
six columns show principal statistics based on the number
of tweets.

4. MUSIC RECOMMENDATION MODELS
In the considered music recommendation models, each
user u ∈ U is represented by a set of artists listened to A(u).
All approaches determine for a given seed user u a number K
of most similar neighbors VK (u), and recommend the artists
listened to by these VK (u), excluding the artists A(u) already known by u. Formally, the recommended
artists R(u)
S
for user u are computed as R(u) = v∈VK (u) A(v) \ A(u)
and VK (u) = argmaxK
v sim(u, v) ∀ v ∈ (U \ u). In considering geographical information for user-context models, we
investigate the following approaches, which differ in the way
this similarity term sim(u, v) is computed.
GEO: Our geospatial approach models each user’s location with a Gaussian mixture model (GMM) of up to 3 components. For each user, the set of latitude and longitudes
for each tweet are taken. If at least 3 unique locations exist in the data, then a GMM with 3 components is used.
Otherwise, if 2 unique tweet locations exist, a model with 2
components is used, otherwise a GMM with a single component is used. Once each user is represented as a GMM of
their tweet locations, a distance is computed between each
pair of users. The earth mover’s distance is considered by
sampling from each user’s GMM and computing the distance between their probability distributions. The inverse
distances are used for determining user similarity sim(u, v).
CULT: In the cultural approach, we select the neighbors
for the seed user only according to a geographical similarity computed by means of the Jaccard index on listening
distributions over semantic locations. We consider as such
semantic categories continent, country, and state. For each
user, we obtain the relevant locations by computing the relative frequencies of his listening events over all locations. To
exclude continents, countries, and states that are unlikely to
contribute to the user’s cultural circle, we retain only locations at which the user has listened to music with a frequency
above his own average6 . On the corresponding listening vectors over locations of two users u and v, we compute the Jaccard index to obtain sim(u, v). Depending on the location
category user similarities are computed on, we distinguish
CULT continent, CULT country, and CULT state.

MICROBLOG MUSIC DATA

Publicly available, standardized datasets of music listening behavior are rare. In particular when looking for datasets
of real-world, commercial size, to the best of the authors’
knowledge the “Million Song Dataset”2 [1] and the “Yahoo!
Music Dataset”3 [3] used in the KDD Cup 20114 are the
only ones. While the former comes with tens of millions of
<user, song, playcount> triples and the latter with hundreds of millions of <user, song, rating> instances, none
of these collections include listener location.
Recently, a dataset of music listening activities inferred
from microblogs has been released [4]. This so-called “Million Musical Tweets Dataset”5 (MMTD) is an extension of
the “MusicMicro” set [10], is freely available, and comprises
almost 1,100,000 listening events of 215,000 users listening
to a total of 134,000 unique songs by 25,000 unique artists.
Since this dataset includes longitude and latitude coordinates for each listening event, it is well-suited for locationaware music recommendation. We thus use it in our experiments.
Since the MMTD dataset contains a lot of users with too
few listening events to make reliable recommendations, we
consider only users with at least five listening events by dif1

Consider, for example, North Korea vs. South Korea, which
are geographically close, but may not necessarily share similar music preference.
2
http://labrosa.ee.columbia.edu/millionsong
3
http://music.yahoo.com
4
http://www.sigkdd.org/kdd2011/kddcup.shtml
5
http://www.cp.jku.at/datasets/MMTD

6

This way we exclude, for instance, locations where the user
might have spent only a few days during vacation.

988

CF: We also consider a user-based collaborative filtering
approach. Given the artist playcounts of seed user u as a
~ (u) over all artists in the corpus, we first omit the
vector P
artists that occur in the test set (i.e. we set to 0 the playcount values for artists we want our algorithm to predict).
~ (u) so that its Euclidean norm equals 1
We then normalize P
and compute similarities sim(u, v) as the inner product be~ (u) and P
~ (v).
tween P
CF+GEO: This approach is a combination of CF and
GEO. To this end, we construct a new user-user-similarity
matrix as the point-wise product of the similarity matrices
given by the CF and by the GEO approaches, to incorporate both music preference and geospatial information. The
similarity sim(u, v) between two users u and v is then given
by this new matrix.
CF+CULT: This approach works by combining the CF
similarity matrix with the CULT similarity matrix in the
same way as the CF+GEO approach does.
RB: For comparison, we further implemented a random
baseline model that randomly picks K users and recommends the artists they listened to. The similarity function
can thus be considered sim(u, v) = rand [0,1].

5.

alone. For small values of N , CF+GEO performs very similar to CF and to the best combination of CF and CULT. We
can also see that adding the GEO component to the CF approach improves CF’s performance, though only marginally.
Another interesting finding is that modeling users as distributions over coordinates and determining neighbors by
computing similarities between these distributions (GEO)
performs quite similar to defining user similarity based on
whether users typically reside on the same continent, in the
same country, or in the same state (CULT). However, the
former performance is more stable than the latter. The unstable results for approaches involving a CULT component
for higher values of N are likely due to fact that the limited
number of closest neighbors does not allow to recommend
a substantial number of N artists, in particular for narrow
geographical levels such as state. This also holds for the
combination with CF as the CF weights are suppressed via
the point-wise multiplication of CF and CULT. Other fusion
techniques will be investigated in future work.
Highest recall for almost any precision value is achieved
by CF+GEO. This is due to the fact that considering location helps to better diversify recommendations, yielding
to higher recall for users with music tastes further away
from the mainstream. Compared to CF approaches that
commonly suffer from a popularity bias (i.e. popular items
are recommended more frequently than lesser known ones),
geospatial models seem capable of alleviating this issue.

EVALUATION

5.1 Experimental Setup
To assess the quality of the different approaches, we perform 5-fold cross validation experiments on the user level,
i.e. we predict 20% of each user’s artists based on the remaining 80% (varying the artists in the 20:80 split five times per
user). We compute performance measures (precision and recall) by averaging over all users in the corpus. To compare
performance between different approaches, we use a parameter N for the number of recommended artists, and adapt
dynamically the number of neighbors K to be considered for
the seed user u. This is necessary as (i) we do not know a priori the number of artists listened to by the K neighbors and
(ii) this number varies between approaches. Using a fixed K
will thus not yield the same amount of recommended artists
for different approaches. To determine a suited value of K
for a given recommendation approach and a given N , we
start the respective approach with K = 1 and iteratively
increase K until the number of recommended artists equals
or exceeds N . In the latter case, we sort the found artists
according to their overall popularity among the K neighbors
and consider as recommendations the top N .
As we could compute Gaussian mixture models for the
GEO approach only for the 767 most active users in the
dataset due to data sparsity, the following results are reported for this subset. However, Pearson’s correlation coefficient for precision and recall obtained on this subset and
on the full dataset is, respectively, 0.9987 and 0.9547 (computed as mean correlation for the models other than GEO).
Results can thus be considered highly comparable.

6. CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK
We proposed two models to define and incorporate geospatial information into music recommendation approaches: one
based on statistical modeling of users’ listening positions
via Gaussian mixture models (GEO), the other on semantic
user locations (CULT) at the levels of continent, country,
and state. We further combined GEO and CULT with collaborative filtering techniques. Evaluation conducted on a
standardized dataset of geolocated listening events showed
that music recommendations based on a combination of collaborative filtering (CF) and GEO outperform both CULT
and CF as well as their combinations.
Future work includes investigating other aspects of the
user context, for instance, listening time, demographics, or
language. We further aim at integrating content-based music descriptors, such as timbre, rhythm, lyrics, or tags. Learning to rank and fusion techniques other than weighting similarities will be assessed, too. Finally, analyzing whether
recommendation performance for users in the “long tail”,
i.e. users with particular music taste, is different from that
of mainstream music listeners is likely to yield clues on how
to tailor music recommendations to different user groups.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by the European Union Seventh Framework Programme FP7 / 2007-2013 through the
project “Performances as Highly Enriched aNd Interactive
Concert eXperiences” (PHENICX), no. 601166, and by the
Austrian Science Funds (FWF): P22856 and P25655.

5.2 Results and Discussion
Figure 1 shows the precision/recall-plot for all investigated approaches, depicting precision/recall-pairs resulting
from different values of N in the range [1, 500]. As can
be seen, all approaches outperform the random baseline.
The CF+GEO approach performs best on average. Combinations of CF+CULT perform inferior to CF (except for
the most general continent setting), but outperform CULT

989

2

RB
GEO
CULT_continent
CULT_country
CULT_state
CF
CF+CULT_continent
CF+CULT_country
CF+CULT_state
CF+GEO

1.8
1.6

precision

1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0

10

20

30

recall

40

50

60

Figure 1: Precision/recall plot.

7.

REFERENCES
[7]

[1] T. Bertin-Mahieux, D. P. Ellis, B. Whitman, and
P. Lamere. The million song dataset. In Proceedings of
the 12th International Society for Music Information
Retrieval Conference (ISMIR), Miami, USA, October
2011.
[2] D. Byklum. Geography and Music: Making the
Connection. Journal of Geography, 93(6):274–278,
1994.
[3] G. Dror, N. Koenigstein, Y. Koren, and M. Weimer.
The Yahoo! Music Dataset and KDD-Cup’11. Journal
of Machine Learning Research: Proceedings of
KDD-Cup 2011 competition, 18:3–18, October 2012.
[4] D. Hauger, M. Schedl, A. Košir, and M. Tkalčič. The
Million Musical Tweets Dataset: What Can We Learn
From Microblogs. In Proceedings of the 14th
International Society for Music Information Retrieval
Conference (ISMIR), Curitiba, Brazil, November 2013.
[5] M. Kaminskas, F. Ricci, and M. Schedl.
Location-aware Music Recommendation Using
Auto-Tagging and Hybrid Matching. In Proceedings of
the 7th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems
(RecSys), Hong Kong, China, October 2013.
[6] C. Liem, M. Müller, D. Eck, G. Tzanetakis, and
A. Hanjalic. The Need for Music Information Retrieval
with User-centered and Multimodal Strategies. In
Proceedings of the 1st International ACM Workshop
on Music Information Retrieval with User-centered

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

990

and Multimodal Strategies (MIRUM), Scottsdale, AZ,
USA, November 2011.
S. Park, S. Kim, S. Lee, and W. S. Yeo. Online Map
Interface for Creative and Interactive MusicMaking. In
Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on
New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME),
Sydney, Australia, June 2010.
Y. Raimond, C. Sutton, and M. Sandler. Automatic
Interlinking of Music Datasets on the Semantic Web.
In Proceedings of the WWW2008 Workshop on Linked
Data on the Web (LDOW), Beijing, China, April 2008.
F. Ricci, L. Rokach, B. Shapira, and P. B. Kantor,
editors. Recommender Systems Handbook. Springer,
2011.
M. Schedl. Leveraging Microblogs for Spatiotemporal
Music Information Retrieval. In Proceedings of the
35th European Conference on Information Retrieval
(ECIR), Moscow, Russia, March 2013.
M. Schedl, A. Flexer, and J. Urbano. The neglected
user in music information retrieval research. Journal
of Intelligent Information Systems, 41:523–539,
December 2013.
M. Schedl and D. Schnitzer. Hybrid Retrieval
Approaches to Geospatial Music Recommendation. In
Proceedings of the 36th Annual International ACM
SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval (SIGIR), Dublin, Ireland,
July–August 2013.

