FitYou: Integrating Health Profiles to Real-Time Contextual
Suggestion
Christopher Wing

Hui Yang

Georgetown University
Washington, DC, USA

Georgetown University
Washington, DC, USA

cpw26@georgetown.edu

huiyang@cs.georgetown.edu

ABSTRACT
Obesity and its associated health consequences such as high
blood pressure and cardiac disease affect a significant proportion of the world’s population. At the same time, the
popularity of location-based services (LBS) and recommender
systems is continually increasing with improvements in mobile technology. We observe that the health domain lacks a
suggestion system that focuses on healthy lifestyle choices.
We introduce the mobile application FitYou, which dynamically generates recommendations according to the user’s current location and health condition as a real-time LBS. It
utilizes preferences determined from user history and health
information from a biometric profile. The system was developed upon a top performing contextual suggestion system in
both TREC 2012 and 2013 Contextual Suggestion Tracks.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information
Search and Retrieval

Figure 1: The FitYou System
system and demonstrate the effectiveness of our system on
the Foursquare platform as a real-time LBS.
Some health domain LBS can find health care providers
[1], but no system has yet accounted for the need to help
people live healthier lifestyles. We propose that healthy,
personalized contextual suggestions can be suggested by considering their medical history and future health goals. By
integrating users’ health needs and their preferences, suggestions can be further personalized to help users live healthier
and happier. Although users can consult with a nutritionist
or physician, a specialist may not always be readily available.
Thus, it is important to have technology that can generate
personalized suggestions whenever necessary.
We separately suggest venues for dining and performing
physical activity that burns at least 150 cal/hour. We selected 13 cuisine types3 to make dining suggestions and prepared a list of 45 activities4 with corresponding number of
calories burned per hour as estimated for a 155 lb person.5

Keywords
Contextual Suggestion; Location based service; Health IR

1.

INTRODUCTION

A 2010 U.S. National survey found that more than onethird of U.S. adults were obese.1 Obesity greatly increases
the risk of diabetes, heart disease, and strokes. In addition,
the National Institutes of Health estimates obesity will cause
approximately 500,000 additional cases of cancer by 2030
given the current obesity trends.2 There has never been
a more important time for people to incorporate healthier
dining options and some form of physical activity.
The Text REtrieval Conference (TREC) 2012-2013 Contextual Suggestion Tracks have identified technologies to retrieve and suggest venues to visit at a user’s current location according to the user’s rated preferences of past venues,
current location’s time, season, traffic, and temperature [2].
More general location-based recommender systems primarily use population interests, user interests, and friends’ interests but often fail to address a health component. In
FitYou, we add a health dimension on top of our TREC
1
2

2.

APPROACH

For testing purposes, we utilize interest profiles provided
by TREC 2013 Contextual Suggestion Track and combine
them with randomly sampled health profiles. First, we mapped
each example venue to one of our categories. Past venues

http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/databriefs/db82.pdf
http://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/factsheet/Risk/obesity

3
Italian, Indian, Japanese, Chinese, American, Korean, French,
Ethiopian, Vegetarian, Vegan, Seafood, Salad, Greek
4
golf, walk, kayaking, softball, baseball, swimming, tennis, running,
bicycling, football, basketball, soccer, outdoors & recreation, archery,
badminton, ballet, ballroom dancing, bird watching, bowling, boxing,
canoeing, rowing, cricket, croquet, skiing, diving, fencing, fishing,
lacrosse, paddleball, polo, racquetball, skateboarding, rollerblading,
table tennis, yoga, hiking, rock climbing, mountain climbing, snorkeling, ice skating, painting, billiards, shopping, museum
5
www.nutristrategy.com/caloriesburned.htm

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage, and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be
honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). Copyright is held by the
author/owner(s).
SIGIR’14, July 6–11, 2014, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.
ACM 978-1-4503-2257-7/14/07.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2600428.2611185 .

1263

are rated by users on a five-level scale Interest score: -0.9
for strongly disinterested, -0.3 for disinterested, 0 for neutral, 0.3 for interested, and 0.9 for strongly interested.
Similar to [5], we employ state-of-the-art matrix factorization approach. We operate Singular Value Decomposition
(SVD) over a user-category matrix SM ×N . Each entry Si,j
is estimated by: Ŝi,j = cTj ui where cj presents category j
and ui presents user i. These vectors are estimated given
the entries in SM ×N . The value of Si,j in the matrix is
determined by the user’s Interest as mentioned above. We
calculate a user’s average interest score across all categories
x̄ui and all users’ average interest score for a category ȳcj :
P
x̄ui =

interest(ui , cj )

cj ∈cat

|cat|

P
ȳcj =

ui ∈users

All activity types were sorted by their ATS. We first returned one venue corresponding to each major interest to
increase the likelihood the user will find the first recommendations valuable. Next, we considered both major and
non-major interests. One venue from the highest scoring activity was returned. After a venue of a given activity type
was returned, the ATS score was discounted by 25% and the
activity types are re-sorted. This ensures adequate variety
in the recommendations. This process was continued until
50 recommendations were determined.

2.3

interest(ui , cj )
|users|

One of the key factors in our success in TREC Contextual
Suggestion evaluations [4] is our focus on satisfying users’
major interests. We classify a category as a major interest
if a user’s score for the category is greater than the average of
his score over all categories and if his score for the category
is greater than the mean of all users for this category, that
is, if Pinterest (ui |cj ) > x̄ui and Pinterest (ui |cj ) > ȳcj .

2.1

Integrating Health Profile

The user health profile contains: age, gender, height, weight,
neck, forearm, waist, hip, wrist, prevailing health conditions,
and exercise preference (light, medium, or intense). In production, users will provide and update their health profile as
needed. In order to experiment using the TREC dataset, we
had to randomly sample health profiles. We assume health
profiles and Interest are independent.
We next calculate biometrics using the health profile. Body
w(kg)
or h(m)
mass index (BMI) is 703×w(lb)
2 . Body fat percentage
h(in)2
for male and
(BFP) is 100×(w−(1.082×w+94.42)−4.15×waist))
w
100 × (w − (.732 × w + 8.987 + wrist
−
.157
×
waist
− .249 ×
3.14
hip+.434×f orearm)/w for female. Lastly, we provide a suggested weight using the J. D. Robinson formula: 52kg+1.9kg
per inch over 5 feet for male and 49kg + 1.7kg per inch over
5 feet for female [3]. w is weight and h is height; other measures are circumferences of the body parts. Users can accept
the suggested weight or manually set a target weight.

2.2

Activity Suggestion

Although calorie burning varies with body weight, the
change is proportional for all activities. Considering the
TREC dataset, we added a few activities which are not often
associated with calorie burning such as shopping, museum,
and outdoors and recreation, and estimated the calorie burning for venues of these types to be half that of walking.
When suggesting activity venues, we consider user interest, variety, and exercise intensity. Given the user’s current
location, we issue separate queries for each activity type and
collect the first fifty results. We determine each activity
type’s score (ATS) by combining health and interest:
AT S = α

CaloriesBurnedP erHour
+ (1 − α)Interest
1000

Dining Suggestion

We observe macronutrient information such as protein,
fat, and carb content is not available for many restaurants;
thus dining recommendations are optimized by considering
calorie content. We estimated the typical calories in a meal
for each cuisine type by randomly selecting several restaurants of each cuisine type that had caloric information available. We randomly selected entrees from each restaurant
and computed the geometric mean for each cuisine type.
When recommending dining venues, we consider user interest, cuisine type variety, health conditions, and whether
the user is trying to lose or gain weight. We determine each
cuisine type’s score (CTS), which differs from ATS by introducing γ = −1 to penalize calories if the user needs to lose
weight, else γ = 1. The dining suggestion process follows
the same logic as for activity suggestions.
CT S = γα

3.

CalP erM eal
+ (1 − α)Interest
1000

(2)

USER EXPERIENCE AND CONCLUSION

As obesity rates and their associated health concerns have
prodigious effects upon a significant proportion of the world’s
population, we determine a new type of contextual suggestion system should exist to help users live healthier lifestyles.
FitYou, developed upon our system in the 2012 and 2013
TREC Contextual Suggestion Tracks, integrates health profile and preference history to generate personalized suggestions according to the user’s current location and its context.
Users have received high quality suggestions at different
contexts ranging from Washington, DC to Vernon, CT. Based
on initial user testing, we are confident that FitYou can supplement a physician’s advice to help health-conscious users
improve their lives by suggesting healthy recommendations
that they enjoy. For future work, we would like to implement
further personalized dining recommendations as restaurant
data becomes increasingly available.

4.

REFERENCES

[1] M. N. K. Boulos. Location-based health information
services: a new paradigm in personalised information
delivery. Int J Health Geogr. 2003.
[2] A. Dean-Hall, C. Clarke, J. Kamps, P. Thomas,
N. Simone, and E. Voorhees. Overview of the trec 2013
contextual suggestion track. In TREC ’13.
[3] R. JD, L. SM, P. L, L. M, and A. M. Determination of
ideal body weight for drug dosage calculations. Am J
Hosp Pharm, 1983.
[4] J. Luo and H. Yang. Boosting venue page rankings for
contextual retrieval. In TREC ’13.
[5] J. Wang and Y. Zhang. Utilizing marginal net utility
for recommendation in e-commerce. In SIGIR ’11.

(1)

where we empirically set α = 0.4 and Interest was the interest score. If the user has a health condition such as high
blood pressure or cardiac disease, greater bias is given to
burning calories and α = 0.6. Calorie content is divided by
1000 so that it is similar in magnitude to Interest.

1264

