#trapped! Social Media Search System Requirements for
Emergency Management Professionals
Stefan Raue, Leif Azzopardi and Chris W. Johnson
School of Computing Science
University of Glasgow
Scotland, UK

{stefan.raue, leif.azzopardi, christopher.johnson}@glasgow.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
Social media provides a new and potentially rich source of
information for emergency management services. However,
extracting the relevant information from such streams poses
a number of difficult challenges. In this short paper, we survey emergency management professionals to ascertain how
social media is used when responding to incidents, the search
strategies that they undertake, and the challenges that they
face when using social media streams. This research indicates that emergency management professionals employ
two main strategies when searching social media streams:
keyword-centric and account-centric search strategies. Furthermore, current search interfaces are inadequate regarding
the requirements of command and control environments in
the emergency management domain, where the process of
information seeking is collaborative in nature and needs to
support multiple information seekers.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search and Retrieval
Keywords: Information Seeking, Emergency Management

1.

INTRODUCTION

“Building 9 has collapsed. I’m stuck, help please! #trapped ”
More often than not, when an emergency or disaster strikes
victims and onlookers use social media platforms such as
Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, Flickr to communicate with
friends, family and others [9, 8, 11]. However, unlike the
opening message which makes a specific request for help in a
particular location, most communications about an incident
are not as specific, nor as informative when it comes to using
this information to support and aid emergency responders.
During the early stages of an incident, emergency responders
are often faced with more questions than answers. Information like this may be invaluable in saving someone’s life, but
it may also be a hoax. Consequently, teams of experts from
various domains have to collate and filter information about
the event, e.g. location, severity, and magnitude, from many
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request
permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07 ...$15.00.

1073

different sources (traditional, i.e. phone calls from citizens,
incoming CB radio communications from police officers, etc
as well as new sources coming from social media platforms).
The response team must cooperate to make sense of the situation, by considering context, as well as their experiences
and skills. Any errors made during this process may lead to
an inappropriate response to the incident; putting lives and
property at risk.
It has been argued by Palen, Vieweg and others [9, 8] that
social media platforms provide new and potentially valuable
source of information, which if harnessed correctly could be
of tremendous benefit to emergency response teams. With
the real-time nature of social media platforms and an internet enabled mobile phone in the hands of most citizens
there is an abundance of information now flooding in when
a crisis occurs. However, as alluded to already, most of this
data is not useful for emergency responders, it is potentially
unreliable, uncorroborated, vague, misleading, obvious and
already known, or otherwise irrelevant. This means that
emergency response teams need to deal with the abundance
of potentially relevant and actionable information, and then
sort through the information carefully to determine its quality, authoritativeness, specificity, and ultimately its utility
and usefulness in responding to the situation.
Emergency responders work in time-critical and safetycritical environments, thus decisions made in command and
control will affect the outcome of an adverse event (i.e. where
to dispatch and allocate the finite resources at hand). During an incident, or if one is imminent, the information needs
will be determined by the context of that event. Emergency
management services will need to know what type of hazard or crisis they are faced with, what is the severity of the
event, where is its occurring location, and how many people
are likely to be affected. Therefore, the collation of information from various official and unofficial sources, such as
social media platforms, plays a pivotal role in supporting
their situation awareness [2].
To date there have been numerous works that have shown
the utility of social media to help in particular situations [6,
3, 12], for example, providing flood warnings, mapping fire
out breaks and so on. However, most of the time this research is done post-hoc, and outwith the context of emergency response teams. Other work has focused on the development of IR systems that follow, filter and map events
in real-time such as Twitcident [1] or Crisees [7]. Such tools
aim to provide emergency responders and the public with
an overview of an event, however, again such tools have
been developed without a deeper appreciation and under-

standing of the users that will be using these tools. Also in
order to develop appropriate, context-sensitive systems that
support the process of gathering, filtering and analyzing the
publicly available social media information streams, a better
understanding of the users, their search needs and the larger
context of handling an emergency response is required.
Consequently, this paper aims to provide an insight into
current search behavior of emergency management professionals. To this end, we undertake a survey of such professionals to ascertain how they rate the importance of social
media information, what problems they face when dealing
with large information streams, what actors are involved in
their processes, and how information from social media platforms can be incorporated within their current emergency
management procedures.

2.

in England (2011) made it clear that the volume of usergenerated content (UGC) created on social media platforms
could support emergency response agencies to increase situation awareness. However, it also has the potential to overload decision makers with too much information [5]. So we
included a number of questions asking participants whether
they felt overloaded by the abundance of information, and
how they perceived the quality and usefulness of the usergenerated content. In part 4, we examined how accepting
such organizations are in using social media platforms and
how user-generated content could improve their current processes.
For sections 2-5 questions were either open ended or asked
participants to indicate their level of agreement on a sevenpoint Likert scale. When presenting our results, we have
reduce the seven-point Likert scales for agreement to three
categories: (i) disagree, (ii) neutral i.e. neither agree nor
disagree, and (iii) agree. The survey was designed to take
participants approximately 30 minutes to complete. Three
follow-up interviews were then conducted with selected participants to gain further insights into their search behaviors.

METHOD: REQUIREMENTS SURVEY

To ascertain the needs and requirements of emergency response and management teams we devised an online survey instrument to capture how social media was being used
within organizations responding to such incidents. The survey was designed for individuals who are involved in emergency management (EM). The survey contained 64 questions which were divided into five sections:

2.2

The emergency management domain consists of many different types of organizations, such as police forces, fire and
rescue services (FRS), or ambulance services. In order to obtain a large and representative sample of participants from
the EM domain, the survey was sent to (i) organizations with
statutory duties as emergency responders as well as to (ii)
other professional EM bodies, such as the Emergency Planning Society (EPS). Overall using a number of mailing lists,
the survey was distributed to approximately 350 individuals
within the United Kingdom. Within three weeks we received
100 responses, of which 70 were fully completed, and the
other 30 only partially completed which we excluded from
this analysis. The resulting response rate was approximately
20%. Participants reported to work in positions such as
media manager, public communications officer, civil contingency coordinator, and emergency planning officer and were
linked to a variety of organizations, such as council/local authority (37.14%), police force (31.43%), FRS or government
department (14.28%), health board (5.71%) and other (e.g.
maritime and coastguard agency) (11.43%).

1. demographic information and expertise,
2. organizational and individual use of social media,
3. information seeking behavior,
4. technology acceptance of social media platforms, and
5. open ended questions on social media platforms for
emergency management.

2.1

Representativeness and Sample Size

Survey Structure and Background

Part 1 of the survey contained standard demographic questions along with questions about their current position, how
long they have worked in that position/organization, which
department/organization and at which location. Since previous studies on cognitive aspects of information seeking
processes observed substantial differences in search behavior between novices and experts [4, 10]. We also included
questions regarding the participants level of IT expertise,
their usage of social media, level of seniority and experience
in their current position. In part 2, participants were asked
about which social media platforms they used during a crisis,
how they utilized them, and how useful each platform was.
We specifically asked about: Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn,
Google+, YouTube, MyVideo, Flickr, Instagram, Pinterest,
Personal Blogs, and others.
In part 3, we asked several questions regarding their information seeking behavior. Specifically, about the difficulty,
value, quantity, reliability, and verifiability of the information on social media platforms. Also, we wanted to know
how easily or possible it was to share and communicate their
findings within their team/organization. With recent natural and man-made adverse events, such as Virginia Tech
Shooting (2007) or the Japan Earthquake (2012), highlighting the role of social media platforms as a way to mediate
global, real-time communication, allowing the public to create and comment on such content, we were particularly interested in how this surge in information affected emergency
response teams. For example, reports in the aftermath of
the Haiti Earthquake (2010) and the public disorder events

3.

RESULTS

In presenting the results from the survey, we will focus
mainly on presenting our findings from part 2 and 3 of the
survey on information seeking behavior of emergency management professionals.

3.1

Demographics

Most participants (N=70) reported to be in their current position for more than three years (64.29%) and working in their current organization for more than three years
(21.43%), more than 5 years (21.43%) and more than 10
years (42.86%). It is therefore assumed that a majority of
the participants is well aware of their roles and responsibilities in the emergency management environment. In regards
to their self-assessed IT experience, participants (N=69) reported to be competent (46.38%), proficient (33.33%) and
expert (10.14%). When asked about their level of social
media experience, participants (N=69) reported to be competent (34.78%), proficient (28.99%) and expert (5.8%).

1074

3.1.1

Perceived Value of UGC during Incidents

ticipants reported the assessment of importance and veracity
of user-generated content to be difficult - see Table 1.
In order to understand the process of verification and relevance judgment better, we asked what role the user account/profile of the message creator plays during the assessment - see Table 1. From this we conclude that the majority
of emergency management professionals surveyed (74.63%,
N=68) not only base their relevance judgment on factors
related to topic, geography or time, which are mainly describing the context of the incident, but also to the notion of
trust of the information provider. The specific factors, that
are usually taken into consideration during the assessment
of a user profile were not surveyed and may be part of future
research, as it would be important for future systems design
to understand what these judgments are based on. However,
when looking at search strategies 71.46% of the participants
(N=68) reported to search for information by looking at already known accounts. This leads to believe that previous
positive or negative experiences with an account effects the
trust assessment for future incidents. Other methods mentioned to assess information in regards to relevance, trust
and veracity were visualization using geographical information systems to detect accumulation of similar content in a
close proximity of the incident site and cross-validation of
information across multiple information sources.

In order to understand the motivation to search for usergenerated content during incidents, we asked participants
about the perceived value of information exchanged on social media platforms. When asked if there is too much valuable information 13.23% of the participants agreed, 19.12%
neither agreed nor disagreed and an overall of 67.65% disagreed with the statement (N=68). During a follow-up interview one participant said that “there can never be too
much valuable information”. However, when asked if there
is not enough valuable information 35.82% agreed - a further
19.40% of the participants were undecided (N=68). Interestingly 44.78% perceived social media platforms to contain
enough valuable information during an incident. These results may seem contradictory but suggest that while valuable
information exists within UGC finding the right information
poses a significant challenge.

3.1.2

Finding UGC during Incidents

Before asking the professionals to detail their search strategies, we asked them about the difficulty they had in finding
information about an incident. 11.76% of the participants
perceived it to be hard or very hard to find any information at all (N=68). However, 69.11% perceived this task as
easy, while 19.12% neither agreed nor disagreed about the
statement. This seems at odds with the previous findings,
however, this was clarified during the interviews when participants pointed out it was easy to find general and causal
information about an incident, but not specific, relevant, and
useful information, which could be used to inform decisionmaking. When asked about the ease to formulate their information needs, 38.24% of the participants found it easy to
express their needs, while 23.53% perceived it to be difficult
(N=68). During the follow-up interviews, participants noted
that they had a very clear picture of their information needs
and felt confident in expressing them most of the time.
Search user interfaces for social media search provide numerous ways to search/query for information. Table 1 provides an overview of the types of search functionality used
by emergency management professionals to formulate their
search queries.
Looking at the results, there seemed to be two general
methods of findings information. The first one is through the
formulation of a query expressing information needs, similar
to standard web search interfaces. Additionally, content is
followed by using social media specific syntax such as hashtags in the micro-blogging platform Twitter. The second
method appears to be acccount-centric, meaning that the
search for information starts with a specific account or a list
of accounts, rather than a search query.

3.1.3

3.1.4

Collaborative Work with UGC during Incidents

The exchange of information relevant to assess the situation and to facilitate informed decision-making is another
key requirement for any information processing system in
the emergency management domain. The ability to exchange information with other organizations during an incident was perceived to be important by 46.16% of the organizations (N=31). We therefore asked participants about the
ease to transfer findings into other systems and the ease to
exchange social media search results with colleagues inside
and outside their organizations.
During incidents every organization involved in the response will only have limited information processing resources
available. In order to use these resources more efficiently,
tasks such as filtering, annotating or assessing information
should be conducted in a collaborative manner. However,
when participants (N=67) were asked if they are relying on
other organizations to filter information only 28.37% agreed,
whereas 37.31% were neither agreed nor disagreed and 34.33%
disagreed. This is surprising given that the majority of emergency management professionals surveyed indicated to conduct account-centric information filtering.

4.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

In this paper we surveyed 70 professionals working in
emergency management and response environments to ascertain requirements for using social media search systems.
Despite the low signal-to-noise ratio in social media streams,
user-generated content was seen by professionals as a timely
and potentially useful source of information that could inform the decision-making process. However, in order to
incorporate data from these information streams, professionals sought information that was not only topically relevant, but also geographically and temporally and perhaps
most importantly that it was verifiable and from a credible source. Due to the complexity of this task, participants reported that this assessment of user-generated con-

Filtering UGC during Incidents

There is also the need for additional filtering of information. A piece of user-generated content considered to be
topical relevant, e.g. by matching a number of keywords,
may actually be irrelevant for considering in the emergency
management environment. Information can also be classified as misinformation and disinformation and thus should
also not be considered in the decision-making process. When
asked if there is too much misleading information on social
media platforms during an incident 42.65% of the participants (N=68) agreed, 27.94% disagreed and 29.41% neither
agreed nor disagreed. Subsequently the majority of the par-

1075

When looking for relevant/important information during an incident...
...I am mainly using keyword search to find information
...I identify specific keywords/hashtags to follow an incident
...I filter information on the basis of geo-locations
...I look at for reliable sources/users and track their account
When searching for information on social media platforms
during an incident it is hard to...
...identify important information
...verify information
When searching for relevant/important information during an incident
I am looking at the profile of the message creator to ...
...judge the relevance of information
...judge the trustworthiness of information
When searching for information on social media platforms
during an incident it is easy to...
...transfer my findings into other systems
...share my findings with colleagues inside my organization.
...share my findings with colleagues outside my organization.

Disagree
10.45%
8.95%
31.35%
10.44%
Disagree

Neutral
13.43%
17.91%
31.34%
17.91%
Neutral

Agree
76.13%
73.14%
37.31%
71.64%
Agree

38.24%
23.52%
Disagree

16.18%
17.65%
Neutral

46.00%
58.83%
Agree

8.95%
7.46%
Disagree

16.42%
17.91%
Neutral

74.63%
74.63%
Agree

29.42%
25.37%
26.87%

32.35%
23.88%
23.88%

38.24%
50.76%
49.25%

Table 1: Search strategies and tactics employed when information seeking (N=68).
tent in regards to relevance and veracity was very difficult.
When searching for user-generated content, we found that
emergency management professionals employed two main
strategies: keyword-centric search and account-centric
search. The former relies on the expression of information
needs by formulating search queries using keywords or platform specific syntax, such as hashtags. Additional search
operators, e.g. to filter on the basis of geo-information,
though, were not routinely used. Account-centric search
for user-generated content entailed finding a reliable source
then following that user’s experience of the incident. The
majority of professionals (74.63%, N=68) reported that this
assessment of user-generated content regarding trust and
relevance was based on the profile of the content creator.
Therefore, future social media search systems will also need
to provide functionality to support emergency professionals
in this assessment.
Emergency management environments also bring together
a number of actors from various backgrounds and organizations. Thus, in order to establish a joint understanding of
the situation, the information seeking and processing needs
to be collaborative. This was regarded to be very important to facilitate the sharing and communication of findings
within response teams. Thus, search interfaces for emergency management need to be collaborative. In future work,
we shall explore the specific needs of collaborative information seeking and sharing in order to design and build
a search system tailored to the emergency management environment.
Acknowledgments: We would like to thank all participants within the Scottish Responder Community and the
members of the Emergency Planning Society who took the
time and effort to complete this survey despite the high number of severe weather related incidents.

5.

[2] M. R. Endsley. Toward a theory of situation awareness
in dynamic systems. J. of the Human Factors and
Ergonomics Society, 37(1):32–64, 1995.
[3] M. F. Goodchild. Citizens as sensors: the world of
volunteered geography. GeoJournal, 69:211–221, 2007.
[4] Q. Gu, D. Mendonca, and D. Wu. An exploration of
information-seeking behavior in emergency
management. In IEEE Systems, Man and Cybernetics,
volume 2, pages 1798–1803, 2003.
[5] HMIC. The rules of engagement: A review of the
August 2011 disorders. Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of
Constabulary, 2011.
[6] A. L. Hughes and L. Palen. Twitter adoption and use
in mass convergence and emergency events. In
proceedings of the 6th International ISCRAM
Conference, Gothenburg, Sweden, May 2009.
[7] D. Maxwell, S. Raue, L. Azzopardi, C. Johnson, and
S. Oates. Crisees: Real-time monitoring of social
media streams to support crisis management. ECIR,
pages 573–575, 2012.
[8] L. Palen, K. M. Anderson, G. Mark, J. Martin,
D. Sicker, M. Palmer, and D. Grunwald. A vision for
technology-mediated support for public participation
& assistance in mass emergencies & disasters. In Proc.
of the 2010 ACM-BCS VCSC, page 8, 2010.
[9] L. Palen and S. B. Liu. Citizen communications in
crisis: anticipating a future of ict-supported public
participation. In ACM SIGCHI, pages 727–736, 2007.
[10] H. Saito and K. Miwa. A cognitive study of
information seeking processes in the www: the effects
of searcher’s knowledge and experience. In Proc. of the
2nd WISE, volume 1, pages 321–327, 2001.
[11] A. Sheth. Citizen sensing, social signals, and enriching
human experience. Internet Comp., 13(4):87–92, 2009.
[12] L. Spinsanti and F. Ostermann. Retrieve volunteered
geographic information for forest fire. In Proc, of the
2nd IIR Workshop, 2011.

REFERENCES

[1] F. Abel, C. Hauff, G.-J. Houben, R. Stronkman, and
K. Tao. Semantics+ filtering+ search= twitcident.
exploring information in social web streams. In Proc.
of the 23rd ACM Hypertext, pages 285–294, 2012.

1076

