A Geolinguistic Web Application Based on
Linked Open Data
Emanuele Di Buccio

Giorgio Maria Di Nunzio

dibuccio@dei.unipd.it

dinunzio@dei.unipd.it

Department of Information
Engineering
University of Padua
Via Gradenigo 6/a, 35131
Padua, Italy

Department of Information
Engineering
University of Padua
Via Gradenigo 6/a, 35131
Padua, Italy

ABSTRACT

silvello@dei.unipd.it

bution of structural linguistic features,1 and it is the first
linguistic feature atlas on a world-wide scale. The study
of dialectal heritage is the goal of many research groups in
Europe as well. The aim of the EU-sponsored Common
Language Resources and Technology Infrastructure project
(CLARIN)2 is to create an infrastructure which makes language resources (annotated recordings, texts, lexica, ontologies) and technology (speech recognisers, lemmatisers, parsers,
summarisers, information extractors) available and readily
usable to scholars of all disciplines. The heterogeneity of linguistic projects has been recognized as a key problem limiting the reusability of linguistic tools and data collections [1].
For example, the Edisyn search engine – the aim of which
was to make different dialectal databases comparable – “in
practice has proven to be unfeaseable”.3
The research direction we pursue in our work is to move
the focus from the systems handling the linguistic data to
the data themselves. For this purpose the Linked Open
Data (LOD) paradigm is very promising, because it eases
interoperability between different systems by allowing the
definition of data-driven models and applications.
We present a case study of a linguistic project named ASIt
the objective of which is to investigate variations among
closely related languages. The project aims to implement a
system that enables the management of a resource of curated
dialect data and provides access to grammatical data, also
through an advanced user interface specifically designed to
update and annotate the primary data. The ASIt linguistic
corpus is constituted of eight different questionnaires written in Italian and almost 500 translations from the original
Italian questionnaires to one Italian dialect. A questionnaire
is a set of sentences built to study specific linguistic phenomena. Currently there are more than 240 different dialects,
for a total of more than 50,000 sentences.

Digital Geolinguistic systems encourage collaboration between linguists, historians, archaeologists, ethnographers, as
they explore the relationship between language and cultural
adaptation and change. In this demo, we propose a Linked
Open Data approach for increasing the level of interoperability of geolinguistic applications and the reuse of the data.
We present a case study of a geolinguistic project named
Atlante Sintattico d’Italia, Syntactic Atlas of Italy (ASIt).

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.2.8 [Information Systems]: Database Management—
Spatial databases and GIS ; J.5 [Computer Applications]:
Linguistics

General Terms
Design, Management, Standardization

Keywords
Linked Open Data, Digital Geolinguistics, RDF, Ontology

1.

Gianmaria Silvello

Department of Information
Engineering
University of Padua
Via Gradenigo 6/a, 35131
Padua, Italy

INTRODUCTION

Geolinguistics is an interdisciplinary field that incorporates language maps depicting spatial patterns of language
location or the results of processes that lead to language
change [3]. In this context, the linguistic atlas has proved to
be a vital tool and product of geolinguistics since the earliest
stages of the field, and it has provided a stage for the incorporation of modern Geographic Information System (GIS).
Several large-scale databases of linguistic material of various types have been developed worldwide. The World Atlas of Languages Structures (WALS) is one of the largest
projects, with 160 maps showing the geographical distri-

2. A GEOLINGUISTIC WEB APPLICATION
One of the requirements of the ASIt system is to search
and browse specific grammatical structures rather than searching for a specific word or combination of words; moreover,
result presentation and browsing should explicitly consider
the linguistic research task. We developed a graphical user
interface on top of the ASIt System [2] that dynamically

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for prof t or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the f rst page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07.

1

http://www.wals.info/
http://www.clarin.eu/
3
http://www.dialectsyntax.org/
2

1101

!"

%"
&"
&
#"
#

$"

'"
'

Figure 2: ASIt RDF Browsing GUI.
Figure 1: ASIt RDF GeoSearch GUI.
All the components of the interface, e.g. the tag tree and
the result list, show the data generated by SPARQL queries.
The RDF Browsing GUI shown in Figure 2 is based on
the open source LodLive Library.6 The Leaflet javascript7
library is used to visualise the results on a map; we adopted
this library in order to achieve a complete open data approach since it relies on OpenStreetMap data.8 In order to
display the locations in the result set, we used the Leaflet
marker cluster plugin. Each cluster is depicted as a circle;
the number in the centre of the circle refers to the number of
locations that belongs to the cluster. When the user clicks
on a cluster, a zoom is performed in order to show all the
locations within the cluster. Currently, location clustering
is based on the default criterion implemented by the plugin;
future extension of our interface could support diverse clustering strategies, e.g. based on the features of the dialects
spoken in the considered locations.

produces maps on the basis of the user query. The interface
is available at the URL:4
http://purl.org/asit/rdf/search
A screenshot is reported in Figure 1; the circles highlight
the steps performed by a user in a tag-based search. When
the user accesses the search page, a table with the list of
supported tag types is presented (step 1). Tags of a given
type are hierarchically organised in a tag tree. Once the user
clicks on a tag, the tag is added to the selected tag list (step
4); the user can remove a tag from the list by clicking on it.
Moreover, the user can select the Boolean constraint for the
tag-based search.
Two different types of result presentation are currently
supported. The first one consists of the list of sentences that
satisfy the query. For each of the sentences in the result set,
information on the document that contains that sentence,
the sentence identifier and fulltext is reported. The user
can browse the RDF Graph associated to these resources as
shown in Figure 2.
The second result presentation supports the users in the
investigation of the geographical distribution of linguistic
phenomena. When the user clicks on the “Search on Map”
button, the results are shown on a dynamically generated
map. When the user clicks on the marker corresponding to
a specific location, information on the location is displayed.
For instance, in step 6 of Figure 1 the user clicked on the
marker corresponding to the location “Calasetta”.

Acknowledgment
This work has been supported by the project “Un’inchiesta
grammaticale sui dialetti italiani: ricerca sul campo, gestione dei dati, analisi linguistica” (Bando FIRB – Futuro
in ricerca 2008) and the PROMISE network of excellence
(contract n. 258191) project, as part of the 7th Framework
Program of the European Commission.

3. REFERENCES
[1] C. Chiarcos. Interoperability of corpora and
annotations. In Linked Data in Linguistics, pages
161–179. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012.
[2] E. Di Buccio, G. M. Di Nunzio, and G. Silvello. A
system for exposing linguistic linked open data. In
TPDL, volume 7489 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 173–178. Springer, 2012.
[3] S. Hoch and J. J. Hayes. Geolinguistics: The
Incorporation of Geographic Information Systems and
Science. The Geographical Bulletin, 51(1):23–36, 2010.

Technical Details
The ASIt dataset is represented by RDF triples (subject,
predicate, object) and maintained in a triple store. The
triples can be accessed through HTTP requests to a SPARQL
Endpoint.5
4

The Web application is optimised for Firefox browsers.
SPARQL is a recursive acronym for SPARQL Protocol and
RDF Query Language; a SPARQL endpoint is the URI at
which an HTTP server services HTTP requests and sends
back HTTP responses for SPARQL Protocol operations —
see http://www.w3.org/TR/sparql11-protocol/
5

6

http://lodlive.it/
http://leafletjs.com/
8
http://www.openstreetdata.org/
7

1102

