Information Seeking in Digital Cultural Heritage with
PATHS
Mark M. Hall,
Paul D. Clough,
Samuel Fernando,
Paula Goodale,
Mark Stevenson
Sheffield University
S1 4DP, Sheffield, UK
{m.mhall,p.d.clough,
s.fernando,p.goodale,
r.m.stevenson}@sheffield.ac.uk

Eneko Agirre,
Arantxa Otegi,
Aitor Soroa
University of the Basque
Country
Donostia, Spain
{e.agirre,arantza.otegi,
a.soroa}@ehu.es

ABSTRACT

MDR Partners
United Kingdom
kate.fernie@mdrpartners.com
jillian.griffiths@mdrprojects.com

initial overview over the collection [2], functions for exploring collections [4] such as thesauri [7] and faceted browsing
[1], somewhere to collect potentially relevant items [5], and
finally the ability to organise the items into a sense-making
structure.
The PATHS (Personalised Access To cultural Heritage
Spaces) project aims to address this issue through a combination of content pre-processing and front-end application
functionality. The demo presented in this paper showcases
the second PATHS prototype that has been developed based
on the experience of building, using, and evaluating the first
prototype. While the prototype uses cultural heritage data,
it can be applied to data-sets from other domains as well.

Current Information Retrieval systems for digital cultural
heritage support only the actual search aspect of the information seeking process. This demonstration presents the
second PATHS system which provides the exploration, analysis, and sense-making features to support the full information seeking process.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information
Search and Retrieval; H.5.3 [Information Interfaces and
Presentation]: Group and Organization Interfaces

2.

Keywords

THE PATHS SYSTEM

When a new user comes to the PATHS system, they are
offered two main avenues for overviewing and exploring the
collection. One is a set of guided tours, called paths, that
have been curated both by experts and other users, and
represent a more focused version of the paths concept introduced by [6]. These paths take the user on a trip through an
aspect of the collection, providing a first introduction to the
kind of information available. The second avenue is through
the use of an automatically generated thesaurus that provides topic-based exploration support. Figure 1 shows the
textual visualisation that enables the user to explore and
drill down into the thesaurus. Tag-cloud and map-based visualisations are also provided to support users with different
cognitive styles. The inset in figure 1 shows the map-based
visualisation, which creates a novel, two-dimensional semantic map of the thesaurus that supports a visual exploration
of the collection.
As the user explores the collection they can collect individual items into their workspace. This allows them to keep
track of what they have explored and of items that might
help them to fulfil their information needs. The items in the
workspace can be annotated and arranged to support the
analysis of what the user has found.
When the user has found a sufficient number of items
to fulfil their information need they can arrange the items
into a path structure to support the final sense-making step
in the information seeking journey (fig. 2). The path is
an ordered structure of items that supports branching and

exploration; information seeking; interactive information retrieval; demonstration

1.

Kate Fernie,
Jillian Griffiths

INTRODUCTION

Current Information Retrieval (IR) systems in the domain
of digital cultural heritage provide good access for experts
through the standard search-box paradigm [8], as these users
are familiar with the collections, have specific information
needs, and know which keywords to use to satisfy these information needs. However, for users who are new to the
collections or do not have a specific information need the
search box presents an almost insurmountable obstacle [9].
Additionally these IR systems only support a small fraction
of the information seeking process [3, 5], forcing users to
augment the IR systems with other tools.
To support the whole information seeking process for both
experts and novices, IR systems are required that provide an

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07.

1105

Figure 1: Screenshot showing some of the exploration features provided by the PATHS system. The main
area shows the thesaurus for exploring the collection. The inset in the bottom-right corner shows a semantic
map that has been developed to enable a more visual exploration of the collection.

4.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The research leading to these results was supported by
the PATHS project (http://paths-project.eu) funded by
the European Community’s Seventh Framework Programme
(FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement no. 270082.

5.
Figure 2: Overview over an example path on the
topic of “Railways”, showing the ability to structure
the information by creating multiple branches.
user-annotation of each step in the path, creating the user’s
narrative through parts of the collection. Potential uses for
the paths are as a personal overview over a topic that can
evolve as the user further explores the collection, as a virtual
exhibition or story created by a collection curator, or as a
learning object to support teaching activities.

3.

DEMO DESCRIPTION

The PATHS demo will provide a guided tour to the PATHS
system and demonstrate how a user can explore the collection, collect items and then form these into the sensemaking path structure. Participants can then explore the
prototype system on their own, which will be provided at
http://www.paths-project.eu. The demo will provide access to a sub-set of the data available in Europeana1 , covering approximately 1.8 million items from the English and
Spanish collections.

1

REFERENCES

[1] M. Hearst. Clustering versus faceted categories for
information exploration. Communications of the ACM,
49(4):59–61, 2006.
[2] K. Hornbæk and M. Hertzum. The notion of overview
in information visualization. International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies, 69(7-8):509 – 525, 2011.
[3] C. Kulthau. Inside the search process: information
seeking from the user’s perspective. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science and
Technology, 42(5):361–271, 1991.
[4] G. Marchionini. Exploratory search: From finding to
understanding. Communications of the ACM,
49(4):41–46, 2006.
[5] T. Russell-Rose and T. Tate. Designing the search
experience: The information architecture of discovery.
Morgan Kaufmann, 2013.
[6] F. Shipman, C. Marshall, R. Furuta, D. Brenner, H.-w.
Hsieh, and V. Kumar. Creating educational guided
paths over the world-wide web. In Proceedings of
Ed-Telecom, volume 96, pages 326–331. Citeseer, 1996.
[7] A. Shiri, C. Revie, and G. Chowdhury.
Thesaurus-enhanced search interfaces. Journal of
information science, 28(2):111–122, 2002.
[8] A. Sutcliffe and M. Ennis. Towards a cognitive theory
of information retrieval. Interacting with Computers,
10:321–351, 1998.
[9] M. Wilson, K. B, S. MC, and S. B. From keyword
search to exploration: Designing future search
interfaces for the web. Foundations and Trends in Web
Science, 2(1):1–97, 2010.

http://www.europeana.eu

1106

