TopicVis: A GUI for Topic-based Feedback and Navigation
Debasis Ganguly

Manisha Ganguly

Johannes Leveling

Gareth J. F. Jones

School of Computing, Centre for Next Generation Localisation
Dublin City University, Dublin 9, Ireland

{dganguly, mganguly, jleveling, gjones}@computing.dcu.ie

ABSTRACT

rely on clustering the set of retrieved documents. However,
limitations of the cluster hypothesis mean that each document can only belong to a single cluster (in this case a topic
class), and that clusters are mutually exclusive. However,
in practice, it is observed that expository documents, such
as Wikipedia articles, contain information on several topics, and hence a document can be classified into multiple
categories [2]. For example, the document titled Theory of
relativity, comprising of a mixture of both the special and
the general theories, can be classified to both these classes.
Documents thus have to be considered as a mixed bag of
topics. The generative model, namely the Latent Dirichlet
Allocation (LDA) [1], achieves this by treating each document as a mixture of topic distributions. Previous work on
visualizing topic models involved application of LDA to categorize each Wikipedia article as a mixture of topics, and
allowing navigate through documents related to a chosen
topic [2]. However, the limitations of this system3 are that
it has no provision for: a) query-based information search,
and b) visualization of the topics within a document. The
motivation of our approach is to help the searcher to locate
information on his topic of interest from within a document
which may be comprised of multiple topics. Existing clusterbased search systems, such as Clusty and Carrot, simply categorize the ranked list of documents by topics, but do not
provide the topic-based navigational feature within sections
of documents. The objective of our work is to demonstrate
a user-friendly information access approach within the list
of retrieved documents through topic visualization. To this
end, we developed a web interface, named TopicVis 4 .

This paper describes a search system which includes topic
model visualization to improve the user search experience.
The system graphically renders the topics in a retrieved set
of documents, enables a user to selectively refine search results and allows easy navigation through information on selective topics within documents.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [INFORMATION STORAGE AND RETRIEVAL]: Information Search and Retrieval; H.5.2 [USER INTERFACES]: Graphical User Interfaces

Keywords
Topic Visualization, Latent Dirichlet Allocation

1.

INTRODUCTION

Queries often encompass a wide range of different subinformation needs. For instance, the query relativity theory
may seek for relevant information on the history of relativity,
the special or the general versions of the theory, criticisms
of the theory and so on. This multi-faceted nature of the
information need expressed in a query is manifested in the
retrieved documents, as they tend to form clusters of topics [3]. For instance, a search on Einstein relativity theory
may retrieve documents with information on specific subtopics of relativity theory. A searcher can benefit from a
graphical interface, which provides a visualization of these
topics in the retrieved set of documents, due to easier navigation through these topics. Some existing visualization tools
such as the Clusty 1 and Carrot 2 , can categorize the retrieved
set of documents into groups of topics, and hence provide a
more organized information access to the searcher in comparison to standard web search engines. Both these systems
1
2

2. SYSTEM DESCRIPTION
After receiving a query from the user the TopicVis web
application retrieves a set of documents from a collection
of over 3.69M English Wikipedia articles. The system then
executes LDA on the top ranked documents to obtain the
document-topic and topic-word distributions, i.e. θ and φ
respectively [1]. The φ distribution, along with a list of top
10 most likely words in each topic, is rendered as a pie-chart
on the left part of the screen. Along the right pane of the
TopicVis screen, the ranked list of retrieved documents are
displayed. In addition to showing the title and the snippet of
a document, as in a standard search engine, TopicVis shows
the distribution of topic in each document, with the help of a
stacked bar chart. We now explain the features of TopicVis

http://clusty.com/
http://search.carrotsearch.com/carrot2-webapp/search

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07.

3
4

1103

http://bit.ly/wiki100
http://www.cngl.ie/TopicVis/

Figure 1: Screenshot of initial retrieval overlayed on that of the topic-based feedback using topic 1.
with reference to a screenshot shown in Figure 1, for the
query “Einstein relativity theory”, for which the number of
topics was preconfigured to 5.
Topic distribution in the retrieved set. Each region
in the pie-chart represents a topic in the retrieved set of
documents. The topic number increments clock-wise starting from 1 as shown in Figure 1. From the list of words
displayed below the pie-chart, it can be seen that topics 1
and 5 broadly represent the concept related to the general
theory of relativity, whereas the topics 2 and 3 correspond
to special theory of relativity.
Topic distribution in a single document. Alongside
the title and snippet of a document, TopicVis shows the distribution of topics in its content with the help of a stacked
bar chart. The intention is to provide a visual cue about
the content of a document without the necessity of reading
the snippet. Each region in a stacked bar chart shows the
proportion of text on the corresponding topic. The left most
region of a stacked bar chart corresponds to topic 1 and so
on. It can be observed from Figure 1 that as per expectation,
the first document titled General Relativity has more contribution from topics 1 and 5, whereas the second document
titled History of special relativity has a high proportion of
topics 2 and 3.
Topic-based feedback. A click event in a particular region of the pie-chart re-ranks the resultlist on the basis of
the topic, the region corresponds to. Since each document
is a mixture model of its constituent topics, it can be considered as a vector, where the proportion of each topic is a
component. The document vectors are thus sorted by the
component value corresponding to the selected topic. Figure 1, shows that when a user clicks on the region in the
pie-chart corresponding to topic 1, i.e. the topic on general theory of relativity, the document titled History of loop
quantum gravity is shown on top. Note that this document
has the highest proportion of text on topic 1.

Topic-based navigation. The title of a document is hyperlinked to a standard text-based view. However, in such a
case, it is difficult for a user to locate the sought information
from long expository articles. Since Wikipedia articles are
structured into segments such as sections and paragraphs, a
guided walk through the segments of a document, relevant to
a given topic, can be beneficial. For example, consider that
the user is interested in topic 3, i.e. the topic on frames of
references in the special theory of relativity. Figure 1 shows
that the first document in the retrieved list of documents,
i.e. General relativity, has some contribution from topic 3.
TopicVis facilitates a user to directly jump into the first segment of a document predominated by his topic of interest,
simply by clicking an area of the stacked bar chart corresponding to the topic. The segmentation units, specifically
used for the demonstration, are the paragraphs contained
within the “<p>” and “</p>” tags.
For each segment of a document, we compute the number
of words in each topic with the help of the φ matrix. A
segment is then classified to the topic with the maximum
number of words. The text of each topic classified segment
is bordered on the right with the corresponding colour. Each
segment within a document is annotated with links to the
next and the previous segments on the same topic.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by the Science Foundation Ireland
(Grant 07/CE/I1142) as part of the CNGL project.

3. REFERENCES

[1] D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan. Latent Dirichlet
allocation. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 3:993–1022, 2003.
[2] A. J.-B. Chaney and D. M. Blei. Visualizing topic models. In
Proceedings of ICWSM, 2012.
[3] D. Ganguly, J. Leveling, and G. J. F. Jones. Topical
relevance model. In Proceedings of AIRS ’12, 2012.

1104

