Answering Natural Language Queries over Linked Data
Graphs: A Distributional Semantics Approach
André Freitas, Fabrício F. de Faria, Seán O’Riain, Edward Curry
Digital Enterprise Research Institute (DERI)
National University of Ireland, Galway
IDA Business Park, Lower Dangan, Galway

firstname.lastname@deri.org

ABSTRACT

the construction of SQL or SPARQL queries). On the other
side of the usability spectrum, information retrieval (IR) approaches allow users to search using intuitive keyword-based
interfaces. High usability comes at the expense of query expressivity and eﬀectiveness. Traditional IR approaches do
not provide expressive queries over structured data. At the
core of this usability-expressivity trade-oﬀ is the semantic
gap between the way users express their information needs
and the way structured data is represented. By addressing
this semantic gap, vocabulary-independent/schema-agnostic
queries provide users with greater freedom and eﬃciency for
querying and searching large heterogeneous data sources.

This paper demonstrates Treo, a natural language query
mechanism for Linked Data graphs. The approach uses a
distributional semantic vector space model to semantically
match user query terms with data, supporting vocabularyindependent (or schema-agnostic) queries over structured
data.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information
Search and Retrieval-Search Process

Keywords
Semantic Search, Knowledge Graphs, Schema-Agnostic Queries,
Distributional-Compositional Semantics, Natural Language
Queries

1.

MOTIVATION

Structured data is becoming a central element in the evolution of the Web search experience. Applications such as
Google Knowledge Graph1 are using structured data to provide direct answers to users’ informational queries. The use
of knowledge graphs in search engines is synchronized with
the growth of structured and open data available on the
Web, in particular, Linked Open Data.
Within the realm of the Web and Big Data, databases following the Entity-Attribute-Value (EAV) are becoming progressively more popular, where data is more sparse and the
schema is more complex and heterogeneous. Consuming this
data demands search/query mechanisms with the semantic
ﬂexibility necessary to cope with the semantic gap that exists between user queries and the representation of the data.
Traditional structured query mechanisms for databases allow expressive queries at the expense of usability: the semantic matching process is delegated to data consumers (in
1
http://googleblog.blogspot.ie/2012/05/introducingknowledge-graph-things-not.htm, 2012

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07.

1107

2. TREO: VOCABULARY INDEPENDENT
QUERIES OVER LINKED DATA GRAPHS
This paper presents the demonstration for Treo, a vocabulary independent query mechanism for Linked Data graphs
and EAV databases. Treo allows users to search over EAV
Databases using expressive natural language queries. To
enable semantic ﬂexibility and vocabulary independency, a
principled distributional-compositional semantic model [3] is
used to build a distributional structured vector space model
(T-Space). The distributional semantics component of the
model, based on the Explicit Semantic Analysis [2], supports a semantic approximation between query and dataset
terms: operations in the T-Space are mapped to semantic
relatedness operations using the distributional background
knowledge of Wikipedia. The robustness of distributional
semantics, compared to WordNet based or ontology-based
approaches, lies in the scope of its semantic matching, which
allows matching between terms from diﬀerent grammatical
classes and it is not dependent on manually created structured resources (distributional semantic models are automatically built from texts).
The elements of the query processing approach are depicted in Figure 1. In the query pre-processing phase the natural language query is analyzed by the Interpreter component, where a set of query patterns and features are detected
in the user query. The second phase consists of the vocabulary independent query processing approach which deﬁnes a
sequence of search and data transformation operations over
the data graph embedded in the T-Space, targeting a maximum semantic matching with the query. The Query Planner
generates the sequence of graph semantic search and navigation operations which deﬁnes the query processing plan,
based on a set of query features which are determined in the
pre-processing phase. Each query feature maps to a set of
graph search and navigation operations. The third phase

Figure 1: Query processing architecture.
consists in the execution of the query processing plan operations over the T-Space index. The T-Space VSM model
index is implemented over Lucene 3.5 IR framework.

3.

Figure 2: Example queries: (A) semantic best-eﬀort
answer (B) exact answer.

SYSTEM DEMONSTRATION

The system is demonstrated over the open-domain DBpedia 3.7 and YAGO Linked datasets2 . The full dataset
consists of 128,071,259 triples (17GB) loaded into the Treo
index. A set of natural language queries from the Question
Answering over Linked Data Challenge [1], extracted from
real user queries, are used to demonstrate the system. Users
input free natural language queries and the system returns
two types of results: (i) a list of highly related triples or (ii)
post-processed/aggregate results, depending on the query
type.
For the example query (A) ‘Who is the daughter of Bill
Clinton married to ?’ (Figure 2), the system returns a list
of triples which have the answer for the user query, including the ﬁnal answer ‘Bill Clinton’s child is Chelsea Clinton’
and Chelsea Clinton’s spouse is Marc Mezvinsky. This query
also returns related triples which are not the answer for the
query but which can be quickly ﬁltered by users. This semantic best-eﬀort behavior places Treo in a hybrid scenario
between a question answering and a semantic search system.
In the example, the distributional semantic model was used
to match daughter to child and married to spouse. For the
second query (B), ‘What is the highest mountain ?’ (Figure 2), the system returns a precise answer. In answering
this query, the system ﬁrst determined the class Mountain
in the dataset, expanding all instances associated with this
class. The system used the distributional semantic information to match highest with all properties available for
the instances of Mountain, ﬁnding elevation to be the most
related. The next step sorts all instances by elevation and
retrieves the top most triple. Further examples can be found
at the Treo website3 .

uses WordNet-based similarity approaches as a semantic approximation strategy. Exploring user interaction techniques,
FREyA [5] is a QA system which employs feedback and clariﬁcation dialogs to resolve ambiguities and improve the domain lexicon with the help of users. User feedback is also
used to enrich the semantic matching process by allowing
manual input of query-vocabulary mappings. Compared to
existing approaches, Treo focuses on the use of distributional
semantic models to support a more comprehensive querydata matching mechanism, with a lower adaptation eﬀort for
new datasets. Additionally, Treo uses a distributional structured vector space model (T-Space) [3] to support semantically approximate queries over labelled data graphs (EAV
data model), providing a principled associated IR framework
over structured data.

5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work has been funded by Science Foundation Ireland
under Grant No. SFI/08/CE/I1380 (Lion-2).

6. REFERENCES
[1] 1st Workshop on Question Answering over Linked Data,
http://www.sc.cit-ec.uni-bielefeld.de/qald-1, 2011.
[2] E. Gabrilovich and S. Markovitch, Computing semantic
relatedness using Wikipedia-based explicit semantic
analysis, in Proc. International Joint Conference On
Artificial Intelligence, 2007.
[3] A. Freitas, E. Curry, J. G. Oliveira, S. O’Riain, A
Distributional Structured Semantic Space for Querying
RDF Graph Data. International Journal of Semantic
Computing (IJSC), 2012.
[4] V. Lopez, E. Motta, V. Uren, PowerAqua: Fishing the
Semantic Web, Proc. 3rd European Semantic Web
Conference ESWC, Vol. 4011. p. 393-410, 2004.
[5] D. Damljanovic, M. Agatonovic, and H. Cunningham,
FREyA: An Interactive Way of Querying Linked Data
Using Natural Language, Proc. 1st Workshop on Question
Answering over Linked Data (QALD), (ESWC 11), 2011.

4. RELATED WORK
PowerAqua [4] is a question answering system which uses
PowerMap, a hybrid matching algorithm comprising terminology level and structural schema matching techniques
with the assistance of large scale ontological or lexical resources. In addition to the ontology structure, PowerMap
2
3

http://dbpedia.org
http://treo.deri.ie/SIGIRDemo

1108

