Online Matching of Web Content
to Closed Captions in IntoNow
∗

Carlos Castillo

Gianmarco De Francisci Morales

Ajay Shekhawat

Yahoo! Research
Barcelona, Spain

Yahoo! Labs
Sunnyvale, USA

gdfm@yahoo-inc.com

ajaysh@yahoo-inc.com

QCRI
Doha, Qatar

chato@acm.org
ABSTRACT

IntoNow is a mobile application that provides a secondscreen experience to television viewers. IntoNow uses the
microphone of the companion device to sample the audio
coming from the TV set, and compares it against a database
of TV shows in order to identify the program being watched.
The system we demonstrate is activated by IntoNow for
specific types of shows. It retrieves information related to
the program the user is watching by using closed captions,
which are provided by each broadcasting network along the
TV signal. It then matches the stream of closed captions in
real-time against multiple sources of content. More specifically, during news programs it displays links to online news
articles and the profiles of people and organizations in the
news, and during music shows it displays links to songs. The
matching models are machine-learned from editorial judgments, and tuned to achieve approximately 90% precision.

Figure 1: User interface to display related news.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
second-screen experiences are technologies that have been
predicted to have a high impact during 2013 [3]. They
promise to revolutionize the way we interact with TV by
making it more social and more interactive, and to combine
the freedom and richness of web content with the unifying
communal experience of watching TV.
IntoNow is a second-screen application composed of a mobile app and a remote server. The mobile app listens to the
audio captured by the device’s microphone and transmits a
set of fingerprints to the remote server. The server compares
them against a database, which is updated in real-time, to
identify the show watched by the user. The application then
displays the name of the show and links to multiple services
including comment forums, screenshots with meme-like messages (“CapIt”), and scores and league tables in the case of
sport games. Additionally, the application displays captionbased information including links to identified news articles
(Figure 1) and songs (Figure 2).
The task of automatically selecting information related to
closed captions is similar to the one described by Henzinger
et al. [1]. Our solution involves web search queries to identify
related songs, but not to identify related news. Instead,
news matchings are continuously generated on the server
side by running several machine-learned models to match
the closed captions to a database of web contents.

[Information systems]: Data stream mining; Document
filtering;

General Terms
Algorithms

Keywords
Second screen, television companion, news retrieval

1.

INTRODUCTION

A second-screen experience refers to the use of a companion device, smartphone or tablet, while watching TV. The
habit of using a companion device while watching TV is wellestablished: almost 70% of tablet and smartphone owners
use their devices while watching TV [2]. Smart TV sets and
∗Work done while at Yahoo! Research.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07 ...$15.00.

1115

2.

SYSTEM DESCRIPTION

Text pre-processing. The closed captions arrive as timestamped streams of plain text that we process by segmenting into sentences and performing named entity recognition.
First, to segment the captions into sentences we use a series
of heuristics which include detecting a change of speaker,
conventionally signaled by a text marker (“>>”), using the
presence of full stops, and using time-based rules. For instance, a pause of several seconds indicates a new sentence.
Second, we extract named entities by using a named entity tagger that performs named entity resolution and ranking [4]. Recognized named entities are associated to weights
and represented by URLs of Wikipedia pages.
Example. The input data is similar to this:
[1339302650.918]
[1339302653.353]
[1339302654.555]
[1339302655.856]
[1339302657.558]
[1339302659.259]
[1339302660.000]
[1339302660.467]
[1339302662.169]
[1339302663.203]

>> I HOPE YOU GUYS NOW WILL STOP
TALKING ABOUT LEBRON AND THAT HE
DOESN’T PLAY IN BIG GAMES.
HE WAS PRETTY GOOD TONIGHT, WE
CAN GO AHEAD AND PLAY GAME
SEVEN.
>> GAME SEVEN.
WHAT MORE CAN YOU ASK FOR?
>> THIS IS WHAT NBA BASKETBALL
IS ABOUT.

Figure 2: User interface to display detected songs.

In the output, shown in Figure 1, we include links to news
articles in Yahoo! News, as well as links to Wikipedia pages
for people and organizations mentioned frequently in them.
Song matching. A general convention for TV transcripts
of songs is to have a special indicator, a musical note symbol
(“”), that precedes each line. IntoNow uses this symbol to
identify songs. In particular, we use a finite state automaton to decide whether the current note symbol indicates the
beginning of a song. The system employs several features
to detect state changes, such as the time and the number of
captions since the last note symbol.
Once the automaton detects the beginning of a song, it
starts accumulating the captions into a buffer. When the
buffer reaches a sufficient number of unique non-stop words,
we query the Yahoo! Search engine to retrieve pages from
the Web. If the result page contains a large number of known
lyrics sites, the system extracts the song name and the artist
from the title of the pages. We normalize the song names
and artists as sites differ in how they list them (e.g., “Romeo”
vs “Lil’ Romeo”), and count the number of their occurrences.
If there is a single song name (and artist) that dominates the
distribution of counts, we consider it a match.
We then retrieve matching songs from large online music
stores including iTunes and Amazon, and we determine the
canonical song name and artist from their results. Finally,
we present the user with information about the song, along
with links to obtain more information or buy the tracks, as
shown in Figure 2.

The output of our text pre-processing is similar to this:
- I hope you guys now will stop talking about
[entity: LeBron_James] and that he doesn’t play
in big games.
- He was pretty good tonight, we can go ahead and play
game seven.
- Game seven.
- What more can you ask for?
- This is what [entity: National_Basketball_Association]
basketball is about.

In the output, several lines of closed captions have been
joined together to create longer sentences, and named entities such as LeBron and NBA have been tagged.
News matching. IntoNow obtains the type of each program from an online TV guide. For news matching, we consider programs of type newscast, and four genres of news:
general, sports, entertainment and finance.
We match the processed captions to recent online news
articles obtained from hundreds of sources via the Yahoo!
News aggregator. Captions are matched in the same genre,
e.g., sentences in sports are matched to news in the sports
section of the news aggregator. News in the aggregator that
are older than a genre-specific threshold are ignored.
The matching happens in two steps. In the first step,
we employ a per-genre classification model trained on thousands of examples labeled by editors. In this model, the two
classes are “same story” and “different story”, and each example consists of a sentence and a news story. The features
for the classifier are computed from each sentence-story pair
by applying the named entity tagger previously described
on both elements of the pair, and then by looking at entity co-occurrences. The models are fine-tuned to have high
precision of about 90%, with recall between 50% and 60%.
In the second step, recall is improved by aggregating multiple sentence-level matchings that occur in a short time
period to form a “qualified matching”. This step allows to
leverage the presence of multiple matchings with low confidence close together in time, in order to generate a higherconfidence matching.

3.

REFERENCES

[1] M. Henzinger, B.-W. Chang, B. Milch, and S. Brin. QueryFree news search. WWWJ, 8(2):101–126, 2005.
[2] Nielsen.
In the U.S., Tablets are TV Buddies while
eReaders Make Great Bedfellows. http://blog.nielsen.com/
nielsenwire/online mobile/in-the-u-s-tablets-are-tv-buddieswhile-ereaders-make-great-bedfellows, 2011.
[3] H. Taylor. Will social TV and the second screen move
beyond advertising in 2013?
http://econsultancy.com/
uk/blog/11425-will-social-tv-and-the-second-screen-movebeyond-advertising-in-2013, 2013.
[4] Y. Zhou, L. Nie, O. Rouhani-Kalleh, F. Vasile, and S. Gaffney.
Resolving surface forms to Wikipedia topics. In Proc. of COLING, pages 1335–1343. ACL, 2010.

1116

