Demonstration of Citation Pattern Analysis for Plagiarism
Detection
Bela Gipp1,2, Norman Meuschke1, Corinna Breitinger1, Mario Lipinski1, Andreas Nürnberger2
1

2

Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley

Department of Computer Science
Otto-von-Guericke-University Magdeburg

{gipp, meuschke, lipinski, breitinger}@berkeley.edu, andreas.nuernberger@ovgu.de

Figure 1: Screenshot of CbPD prototype (left plagiarized translation, right source document)
disguised scientific plagiarism, which is currently nonrecognizable. Plagiarized medical and pharmaceutical studies can
jeopardize the safe treatment of patients when not based on
original research.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search
and Retrieval – Retrieval models.

General Terms

Citation-based Plagiarism Detection

Algorithms, Experimentation

To address this problem, we proposed Citation-based Plagiarism
Detection (CbPD) [2]. Compared to existing approaches, CbPD
does not consider textual similarity alone, but uses the citation
patterns within scientific documents as a unique, languageindependent fingerprint to identify semantic similarity.
Evaluations of real-world plagiarism cases have shown that
plagiarists commonly disguise academic misconduct by
paraphrasing copied text, but usually do not substitute or
rearrange the citations copied from the source document.
Motivated by these findings, we developed several CbPD
algorithms; each tailored to a specific form of disguised
plagiarism. We implemented the algorithms in a first citationbased plagiarism detection prototype capable of detecting strongly
disguised plagiarism, even when no textual similarity remains.

Keywords
Plagiarism Detection, Plagiarism Detection Systems,
Citation-based Plagiarism Detection, Cross Language, Text Reuse

Limitations of Plagiarism Detection Systems
State-of-the-art plagiarism detection approaches capably identify
copy & paste and to some extent slightly modified plagiarism.
However, they cannot reliably identify strongly disguised
plagiarism forms, including paraphrases, translated plagiarism,
and idea plagiarism, which are forms of plagiarism more
commonly found in scientific texts. This weakness of current
systems results in a large fraction of today’s scientific plagiarism
going undetected.

We first demonstrated the advantages of the developed CbPD
approach in evaluations using the plagiarized thesis of former
German defense minister Karl-Theodor zu Guttenberg. While
conventional detection approaches could not identify a single
instance of translated plagiarism in the thesis, the novel approach
detected 13 of the 16 translated plagiarisms present [2]. We used
the bioscience full-text collection PubMed Central Open Access
Subset (PMC OAS), which includes 200,000 publications, to
demonstrate the practicability of the CbPD approach on a large
corpus [4]. We machine parsed the citations (in text) and
references (in bibliography) of documents in the PMC OAS and
computed the citation-based similarities between all possible
document pairs using each of the CbPD algorithms. The result is a
database, which contains about 7 million references, 11 million
citations and 750 million citation patterns. The database is the
backbone of the presented prototype, which is available under
www.citeplag.org. Besides the 200,000 publications from the
PMC OAS, the prototype also allows inspection of the plagiarized
thesis of former German defense minister Karl-Theodor zu
Guttenberg.

Prof. Weber-Wulff, the organizer of a regular performance
evaluation of Plagiarism Detection Systems (PDS), gives a
disillusioning summary regarding available systems:
“[…] Plagiarism Detection Systems find copies, not
plagiarism.”[5],
and “[…] for translations or heavily edited material, the systems
are powerless […]” [3].
While undisguised copy & paste-type plagiarism is softwarerecognizable and typically occurs in student essays where it has
no serious consequences for society, a different story holds for
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other
uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07.

1119

side tab also allows the user to set weighting coefficients for each
of the CbPD algorithms, thus creating a hybrid CbPD algorithm
with custom emphasis. The source-code is published as opensource under a creative commons license 3.0.

The screenshot in Figure 1: Screenshot of CbPD prototype (left
plagiarized translation, right source document) shows an excerpt
from this thesis on the left and the corresponding text from the
English source document on the right. The source document is an
interpretation of the U.S. Constitution, which is translated nearly
word-for-word, creating a plagiarism spanning 21 pages. Despite
its length, no textual similarity is retained in the translated
plagiarism, aside from four correctly cited longer quotes. Only
upon visualizing citation patterns using CbPD does the disguised
plagiarism become obvious (Figure 1).

Algorithms
As a raw measure of global document similarity, we include the
Bibliographic Coupling (BC) score, a simple measure of the
absolute number of shared references in the bibliographies of two
documents, in our assessment. However, since BC does not
consider the placement of citations in a document’s full-text, we
developed three “fine-tuned” algorithms which make up the core
of the CbPD approach: Citation Chunking (CC), Greedy Citation
Tiling (GCT) and Longest Common Citation Sequence (LCCS).
Details on these detection algorithms can be found in this
publication [1].

Figure 2: Citation patterns visualized

The Citation Chunking set of algorithms identify individual
matching citation patterns, termed “citation chunks”. The
Citation Chunking algorithms are resilient to slight transpositions
of citation order and inserted or deleted citations.

Using the CbPD approach allowed the identification of previously
non-machine-detectable plagiarism cases. As a result, several
publications, including a fraudulent medical study have already
been retracted. The uncovered plagiarism can be browsed using
the prototype. Nevertheless, the CbPD approach should be viewed
as a supplement to existing software-based plagiarism detection
methods and not a stand-alone replacement, since the individual
strengths of the text-based and citation-based approaches to
plagiarism detection complement each other. The strength of textbased approaches lies in their ability to detect even short instances
of literal plagiarism, e.g. copy & paste. The citation-based
approach excels when little or no textual similarity is present, as
in the case of translated and heavily disguised plagiarism.

The Greedy Citation Tiling algorithms identify sets of matching
citations in identical order, which we call “citation tiles”. Longest
citation pattern matches are identified first, subsequently the
remaining shorter citation pattern matches are considered for
citation tile formation.
The Longest Common Citation Sequence represents the maximum
number of citations two documents share in identical order, when
skipping over the non-matching citations. A document pair has
either exactly one LCCS or no shared citations.

Acknowledgements

Prototype

We wish to acknowledge André Gernandt, Leif Timm, Markus
Bruns, Markus Föllmer and Rebecca Böttche for their
contributions.

The CitePlag prototype features a customizable side-by-side
document visualization, see marker 1 Figure 1, to efficiently
browse scientific documents for text and citation similarities and
aid the user in identifying plagiarism. In this case, the suspicious
document is displayed on the left and the source document is
displayed on the right. When selecting the highlighted text or
citation similarity in either document, the respective section in the
other document is retrieved. The visualization of text and citation
similarities is customizable to the user’s preferences in the menu
bar under ‘settings’, see marker 2 Figure 1.

References
[1] Bela Gipp and Norman Meuschke. Citation Pattern Matching
Algorithms for Citation-based Plagiarism Detection: Greedy
Citation Tiling, Citation Chunking and Longest Common
Citation Sequence. In Proceedings of the 11th ACM
Symposium on Document Engineering, pages 249–258,
Mountain View, CA, USA, 2011. ACM.

A scrollable central document browser, see marker 3 Figure 1,
schematically represents the documents to be compared and
allows for quick interactive document navigation. The document
browser visualizes citation-based similarities according the CbPD
algorithm selected, see marker 4 Figure 1.

[2] Bela Gipp, Norman Meuschke, and Joeran Beel. Comparative
Evaluation of Text- and Citation-based Plagiarism Detection
Approaches using GuttenPlag. In Proceedings of 11th
ACM/IEEE-CS Joint Conference on Digital Libraries
(JCDL’11), pages 255–258, Ottawa, Canada, 2011.

By highlighting matching citations in identical colors and
connecting them in the document browser, see Figure 2, the CbPD
approach visualizes not only the easy to spot global or
copy & paste plagiarism instances, but also local and heavily
disguised plagiarism instances, which remain invisible to
conventional PDS.

[3] HTW Berlin. Portal Plagiat - Softwaretest 2012. Online
Source, 2012. Retrieved November 27, 2012 from: http://plagiat.htw-berlin.de/collusion-test-2012/.
[4] U.S. National Center for Biotechnology Information. PubMed
Central. Online Source, 2011. Retrieved September 27, 2011
from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/.

The menu bar features document ‘statistics’, including graphs
showing the sum of character-matches and bibliographic coupling
strength per page. In a collapsible side tab, additional documents
with high CbPD similarity scores are listed for comparison. The

[5] Debora Weber-Wulff. Test Cases for Plagiarism Detection
Software. In Proceedings of the 4th International Plagiarism
Conference, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK, 2010.

1120

