Entity Linking and Retrieval
Edgar Meij

Krisztian Balog

Daan Odijk

Yahoo! Research
Barcelona, Spain

University of Stavanger
Stavanger, Norway

ISLA, University of Amsterdam
Amsterdam, The Netherlands

emeij@yahoo-inc.com

krisztian.balog@uis.no

ABSTRACT

their information need, rather than merely the documents
that mention them; a process known as entity retrieval.
It is common to consider entities from a general-purpose
knowledge base such as Wikipedia or Freebase, since these
provide sufficient coverage for most tasks and applications.
Wikipedia is therefore a typical target for entity linking and
also a fertile ground for entity retrieval; its rich structure
(including wikilinks, categories, and infoboxes) informs entity linking algorithms and enables advancing over plain
document retrieval. Approaches for linking and retrieving
entities are not Wikipedia-specific, however. Recent developments in the Web of Data enable the use of domain
or task-specific entities. Alternatively, legacy or corporate
knowledge bases can be used to provide entities. Entity
linking and retrieval is also gaining popularity in the public domain, as witnessed by Wolfram Alpha, the Google
Knowledge Graph, digital personal assistants such as Siri
and Google Now, and various vertical search engines focusing on particular entity types.
In this full-day tutorial we present a comprehensive introduction to entity linking and retrieval. Part I of the tutorial
provides a detailed overview of entity linking. We introduce the fundamental concepts and principles, address the
identification and disambiguation of entity occurrences in
unstructured text, and detail state-of-the-art algorithms including unsupervised solutions, graph-based methods, and
feature-based approaches in a machine learning setting. We
continue with applications of entity linking for IR and conclude this part with discussing evaluation methodology.
Part II focuses on entity retrieval and begins with a study
of scenarios where explicit representations of entities are
available in the form of, e.g., Wikipedia articles or RDF
triples. We continue in a setting with more complex queries,
requiring evidence to be collected and aggregated from unstructured textual data—with the potential help of some
structured data. Such queries require a combination of techniques from entity linking and entity retrieval. Throughout
Part II, two main families of models are discussed: generative language models and discriminative feature-based models. Both the entity linking and entity retrieval parts are
anchored in recent evaluation efforts conducted at benchmarking campaigns such as INEX, TAC, and TREC. We introduce test collections, tasks, evaluation methodology, and
experimental results from these evaluation initiatives.
Finally, a number of publicly available toolkits and web
services for entity linking and entity retrieval exist. The last
part of the tutorial will give an overview and comparative
analysis of these, followed by a hands-on session where they
will be evaluated in various settings.

This full-day tutorial presents a comprehensive introduction
to entity linking and retrieval. Part I provides a detailed
overview of entity linking: identifying and disambiguating
entity occurrences in unstructured text. Part II focuses on
entity retrieval, by first considering scenarios where explicit
representations of entities are available, and then moving to
a setting where evidence needs to be collected and aggregated from multiple documents or even collections, thereby
combining techniques from both entity linking and entity retrieval. Part III concludes the tutorial with an overview and
hands-on comparative analysis of applications and publicly
available toolkits and web services.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: H.3.1 Content Analysis and Indexing; H.3.3 Information Search and
Retrieval; H.3.4 Systems and Software

Keywords
Entity linking, entity retrieval, semantic search

1.

d.odijk@uva.nl

OVERVIEW

The explosive increase in the amount of unstructured textual data being produced in all kinds of domains calls for advanced methodologies for making sense of this data. Recent
advances have enabled a precise manner of analysis, where
phrases—consisting of a single term or sequence of terms—
are automatically linked to entries in a knowledge base. This
process is commonly known as entity linking. Entity linking facilitates advanced forms of searching and browsing in
various domains and contexts. It can be used, for instance,
to anchor textual resources in background knowledge; authors or readers of a piece of text may find entity links to
supply useful pointers. Another application can be found in
search engines, where linking queries to entities to improve
the user experience is becoming increasingly prevalent. More
and more, users want to find the actual entities that satisfy

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07.

1127

