The Cluster Hypothesis in Information Retrieval
Oren Kurland
Faculty of Industrial Engineering and Management
Technion — Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa 32000, Israel

kurland@ie.technion.ac.il

Categories and Subject Descriptors

tal knowledge of the retrieval “toolkit” that was developed
based on the cluster hypothesis.

H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Retrieval
Models

3. TUTORIAL OUTLINE

Keywords

• Introduction.

cluster hypothesis

1.

– The cluster hypothesis.
– A high level overview of the effect of the cluster
hypothesis on the IR field.

OVERVIEW

The cluster hypothesis states that “closely associated documents tend to be relevant to the same requests” [1]. This
is one of the most fundamental and influential hypotheses
in the field of information retrieval and has given rise to a
huge body of work.
In this tutorial we will present the research topics that
have emerged based on the cluster hypothesis. Specific focus will be placed on cluster-based document retrieval, the
use of topic models for ad hoc IR, and the use of graphbased methods that utilize inter-document similarities. Furthermore, we will provide an in-depth survey of the suite
of retrieval methods and techniques that rely, either explicitly or implicitly, on the cluster hypothesis and which are
used for a variety of different tasks; e.g., query expansion,
query-performance prediction, fusion and federated search,
search-results diversification.

2.

• Testing the cluster hypothesis.
• Cluster-based document retrieval.
– The dual role of document clusters in clusterbased document retrieval (document selection vs.
document representation).
– Using clusters for document selection.
∗ The optimal cluster problem.
– Using clusters (or topic models) to “expand” document representations.
– Cluster representation.
– Types of clusters (offline vs. query-specific vs.
query-biased; hard vs. soft).
• Graph-based methods utilizing inter-document similarities.
– Centrality-based methods.
– Score regularization.
– Cluster-based and passage-based graphs.

TUTORIAL OBJECTIVES

The primary objective of this tutorial is to present the
cluster hypothesis and the lines of research to which it has
given rise. To this end, much emphasis will be put on fundamental retrieval techniques and principles that are based
on the cluster hypothesis and which have been used for a
variety of IR tasks. The more specific goals of the tutorial
are to provide attendees with (i) the required background
to pursue research in topics that are based on the cluster
hypothesis; (ii) an overview of the different tasks for which
the cluster hypothesis can be leveraged; and, (iii) fundamen-

• Additional IR tasks for which inter-document similarities are used.
– Using document clusters to visualize retrieved results; query expansion; cross-lingual retrieval; queryperformance prediction; fusion and federated search;
search-results diversification.
• Open challenges.
• Summary.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07.

Acknowledgments We thank the reviewers for their comments.

4. REFERENCES
[1] C. J. van Rijsbergen. Information Retrieval. Butterworths,
second edition, 1979.

1126

