Designing Search Usability
Tony Russell-Rose
UXLabs
London
+44 7779 36191

tgr@uxlabs.co.uk
ABSTRACT
Search is not just a box and ten blue links. Search is a journey: an
exploration where what we encounter along the way changes what
we seek. But in order to guide people along this journey, we must
understand both the art and science of search experience design.
The aim of this tutorial is to deliver a course grounded in good
scholarship, integrating the latest research findings with insights
derived from the practical experience of designing and optimizing
an extensive range of commercial search applications. It focuses
on the development of transferable, practical skills that can be
learnt and practiced within a half-day session.



Understand the role of design patterns, and how to
apply UI design principles and patterns from various
libraries in designing search user interfaces



Gain an awareness of the key resources available within
the user experience community and how to apply these
to practical design challenges

2. TUTORIAL CONTENT
The course comprises the following sections:
1.

Introductions and objectives: Group introductions &
ice-breaker. A brief summary of what each participant
hopes to gain from the session, and what experiences
they bring.

2.

Understanding search & discovery behaviour: An
overview of the key theories and models of humaninformation seeking behaviour and their relationship to
more practitioner-oriented frameworks.

3.

Varied solutions for varied contexts: An exploration
of the universal dimensions that define informationseeking behaviour, and how these translate into
principles for the design of search and discovery
experiences.

4.

Formulating the query: A detailed examination of the
various methods by which information needs can be
elicited, disambiguated and refined, and how design
interventions can support this process.

5.

Displaying results: The counterpart to
exploration of the key issues and
underpinning the display and manipulation
results, and how they can be used to
productive user journeys.

6.

Faceted Navigation & Search: A review of the key
principles of faceted classification and their practical
implications for the design of effective faceted search
applications.

7.

Conclusions & Wrap-up: A review of the overall
session, including the shared experiences of the group
exercises and the contrasting findings of each. A
summary of the follow-on resources and takeaways
from the course and the wider UX design community.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Search process;
H.5.2 [User Interfaces]: (D.2.2, H.1.2, I.3.6)

General Terms
Design, Human Factors.

Keywords
Site search, enterprise search, information seeking, user needs,
information discovery, user experience design, usability.

1. COURSE OBJECTIVES
Participants in this tutorial will:


Explore the fundamental concepts and principles of
Human-Centered Design for information search and
discovery



Study models of human information-seeking behavior
and learn how to apply interaction design principles
based on those models



Learn how to differentiate between various types of
search behavior: known-item, exploratory, lookup,
learning, investigation, etc. and how they combine to
form composite search strategies and patterns



Develop an understanding of the key dimensions of user
type, goal, context and mode of interaction, and how to
apply these dimensions when designing applications

(4): an
principles
of search
facilitate

3. REFERENCE

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other
uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07.

[1] Russell-Rose, T. and Tate, T. 2012. “Designing the Search
Experience: the Information Architecture of Discovery”.
Morgan Kaufmann.

1129

