Searching in the City of Knowledge: Challenges and
Recent Developments
Veli Bicer, Vanessa Lopez
IBM Research, Dublin, Ireland

{velibice,vanlopez}@ie.ibm.com

ABSTRACT

search engines such as Google+ Local1 , Yahoo! Local2 , or
ask.com’s AskCity3 already take an initial step to answer
some vital information needs. However, when it comes to
answering more complex user information needs, the existing local search engines have certain limitations in terms of
understanding these complex needs and also capturing the
required information from different city data sources in response to them.
There exists a number of unique challenges and opportunities for the IR community to make such a type of heterogeneous city data searchable. To achieve that, there is
a need first to acquire, integrate, manage, and analyze relevant city data across different sources to dynamically answer
different queries [2]. This is unlike the classical local search
engines which rely on a limited number of sources (e.g. Web
documents) or a curated proprietary knowledge base to unambiguously acquire the city-related information. In fact,
the source of information in a city setting may range from
the city databases4 or services to the sensor or social media
streams, each of those providing different sort of information with varying timeliness and relevance. It is a unique
data-centric application domain for many foundational IR
techniques to be applied on.
This tutorial will present the deep insights, novel challenges, opportunities and techniques to make city data queryable. We will present what “searching the city data” actually
means beyond the current approaches to answer the possible information needs of the city inhabitants and how they
differ from searching the Web or enterprise data. We will
also present how common IR techniques and emerging models [1, 3] can be employed and adapted to retrieve the relevant information for the users, and how the relevancy can
be improved by considering different city-specific aspects in
different stages of search process.

Today plenty of data is emerging from various city systems.
Beyond the classical Web resources, large amounts of data
are retrieved from sensors, devices, social networks, governmental applications, or service networks. In such a diversity of information, answering specific information needs of
city inhabitants requires holistic IR techniques, capable of
harnessing different types of city data and turned it into
actionable insights to answer different queries. This tutorial will present deep insights, challenges, opportunities and
techniques to make heterogeneous city data searchable and
show how emerging IR techniques models can be employed
to retrieve relevant information for the citizens.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information
Search and Retrieval

General Terms
Algorithms, Experimentation

1.

INTRODUCTION

Majority of people reside in cities (estimated over 70%
of the world population by 2050) - a situation posing several challenges for municipalities, governments, citizens and
businesses. In an urbanizing world, cities comprise of different systems ranging from transport, water, and electricity data management infrastructures to social, communication and service networks. The data emerging from these
systems is a precious resource to make cities more intelligent, innovative and integrated beyond the boundaries of
isolated applications. Today, beyond the classical Web resources (e.g. documents) large amounts of data are retrieved
from sensors, mobile devices, social network messages, governmental applications, or service networks. In such a diversity of information, the specific information needs of the
city inhabitants requires a holistic IR and data management
techniques, capable of harnessing different types of city data
and to turn into actionable insights. In fact, existing local

2.

REFERENCES

[1] V. Bicer, T. Tran, and R. Nedkov. Ranking support for
keyword search on structured data using relevance
models. In CIKM, pages 1669–1678, 2011.
[2] V. Lopez, S. Kotoulas, M. L. Sbodio, M. Stephenson,
A. Gkoulalas-Divanis, and P. M. Aonghusa. Queriocity:
A linked data platform for urban information
management. In ISWC, pages 148–163, 2012.
[3] M. L. S. Vanessa Lopez, Spyros Kotoulas and R. Lloyd.
Guided exploration and integration of urban data. In
Hypertext. ACM, 2013.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07.

1

https://plus.google.com/local
http://local.yahoo.com/
3
http://city.ask.com/
4
http://www.dublinked.ie/
2

1123

