Scalability and Efficiency Challenges in
Commercial Web Search Engines
B. Barla Cambazoglu

Ricardo Baeza-Yates

Yahoo! Labs
Barcelona, Spain

Yahoo! Labs
Barcelona, Spain

barla@yahoo-inc.com

rbaeza@acm.org

ABSTRACT

This tutorial aims to provide a fairly comprehensive
overview of the scalability and efficiency challenges in largescale web search engines [1]. In particular, the tutorial provides an in-depth architectural overview of a web search engine, mainly focusing on the web crawling, indexing, query
processing, and caching components. The scalability and
efficiency issues encountered in the above-mentioned components are presented at four different granularities: at the
level of a single computer, a cluster of computers, a single
data center, and a multi-center search engine. The tutorial also points at the open research problems and provides
recommendations to researchers who are new to the field.

Commercial web search engines rely on very large compute
infrastructures to be able to cope with the continuous growth
of the Web and user bases. Achieving scalability and efficiency in such large-scale search engines requires making
careful architectural design choices while devising algorithmic performance optimizations. Unfortunately, most details
about the internal functioning of commercial web search engines remain undisclosed due to their financial value and the
high level of competition in the search market. The main
objective of this tutorial is to provide an overview of the fundamental scalability and efficiency challenges in commercial
web search engines, bridging the existing gap between the
industry and academia.

2.

OBJECTIVES

The tutorial aims to achieve the following objectives:

Categories and Subject Descriptors

1. To provide in-depth background on the basic architectural components in a web search engine.

H.3.3 [Information Storage Systems]: Information Retrieval Systems

2. To present the fundamental scalability and efficiency
issues which have been often addressed in the information retrieval literature.

General Terms
Algorithms, Design, Performance

3. To shed some light into the techniques used in largescale commercial search engines and bridge the gap
between the industry and academia.

Keywords
Web search engines, crawling, indexing, query processing,
caching, efficiency, scalability.

1.

4. To identify the open research problems in the context
of web search engine scalability and efficiency, promoting further research on the topic.

DESCRIPTION

Commercial web search engines need to process thousands of queries every second and provide responses to user
queries within a few hundred milliseconds. As a consequence
of these tight performance constraints, search engines construct and maintain very large compute infrastructures for
crawling the Web, indexing discovered pages, and processing user queries [3]. The scalability and efficiency of these
infrastructures require careful performance optimizations in
every major component of the search engine [2].

3.

REFERENCES

[1] B. B. Cambazoglu and R. Baeza-Yates. Scalability
challenges in web search engines. In M. Melucci,
R. Baeza-Yates, and W. B. Croft, editors, Advanced
Topics in Information Retrieval, volume 33 of The
Information Retrieval Series, pages 27–50. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2011.
[2] A. Chowdhury and G. Pass. Operational requirements
for scalable search systems. In Proceedings of the 12th
International Conference on Information and
Knowledge Management, pages 435–442, 2003.
[3] J. Dean. Challenges in building large-scale information
retrieval systems: invited talk. In Proceedings of the
2nd ACM International Conference on Web Search
and Data Mining, page 1, 2009.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07.

1124

