Workshop on Health Search and Discovery:
Helping Users and Advancing Medicine
Ryen W. White1, Elad Yom-Tov1, Eric Horvitz1, Eugene Agichtein2, William Hersh3
1Microsoft

Research, 2Emory University, 3Oregon Health & Science University

{ryenw,eladyt,horvitz}@microsoft.com, eugene@mathcs.emory.edu, hersh@ohsu.edu
benefit, which need to be explored in more detail. We envisage that
the expertise of the SIGIR community will provide helpful insights
on matters of privacy, as well as retrieval, personalization, expertise
modeling, search interface design, data mining, and others; all of
which are critical to enabling advances this area. Through presentations and discussions at the workshop we hope to outline how the
IR community can play a central role the future of health search and
discovery, and bring benefit to health seekers everywhere.

ABSTRACT
This workshop brings together researchers and practitioners from
industry and academia to discuss search and discovery in the medical domain. The event focuses on ways to make medical and health
information more accessible to laypeople (including enhancements
to ranking algorithms and search interfaces), and how we can discover new medical facts and phenomena from information sought
online, as evidenced in query streams and other sources such as social media. This domain also offers many opportunities for applications that monitor and improve quality of life of those affected
by medical conditions, by providing tools to support their healthrelated information behavior.

2. WORKSHOP OVERVIEW
The event comprises discussions (including brainstorming and
breakouts), keynotes, and other presentations on papers submitted
in response to an open call. The themes of the workshop include:

Categories and Subject Descriptors

•

H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search
and Retrieval—search process, selection process; H2.8 [Database Management]: Database applications—data mining.

•

Keywords

•
•

Health seeking; Medical discovery; Data mining; Social media.

1. BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION

•
•

Health-related information is one of the most widely searched domains on the Web. A recent survey by the Pew Internet and American Life Project found that 59% of U.S. adults have looked online
for health information in the past year, with 35% of respondents
attempting to diagnose a medical condition online [1]. Health information seeking is conducted using both search systems such as
Internet search engines and via social media (e.g., advice from
friends). Research has indicated that cyberspace can be a dangerous
place for those with no medical training. Web search engines can
surface alarming content that can cause unwarranted anxiety [4].

•
•
•
•
•

Predictive analysis from large-scale data such as behavioral
logs, microblogging, and other social media;
Mining large-scale content (e.g., logs, Web crawls) for insights and links between conditions, drugs, and cohorts;
Establishing the reliability of online health content;
Diagnostic search by patients and health practitioners and its
cognitive impact;
Modeling the effect of domain expertise on health seeking;
Query formulation for medical retrieval (including query expansion, UMLS, concept-hierarchies, etc.);
Visualization and exploration of medical information;
Privacy issues on the storage and retrieval of medical content;
Personalization of short- and long-term health interests;
Platforms for storing and maintaining health and fitness information (e.g., HealthVault), and;
Social networks for sharing and monitoring health-related
content (e.g., PatientsLikeMe).

Discussions at the event will target many of these topics. One area
of particular interest is challenges in improving health search for
laypeople. Websites such as WebMD.com, eHealthme.com, and
PatientsLikeMe.com provide medical information or peer support
to health seekers. We will discuss improvements to health search
via, for example, synthesizing health content from many sources,
and considering base rates and source reliability in result ranking.

Such challenges necessitate new information retrieval (IR) methods—both backend and frontend—to significantly improve the
search experience for health information seeking. These methods
can, for example, translate layman and technical terminology, and
consider domain knowledge and interpretability and health-related
reliability or authority during ranking or crawling [3]. This domain
also presents unprecedented opportunities for the development of
applications that monitor and improve the quality of life of people
affected by a variety of medical conditions via tools to support their
health-oriented information behavior. Mining aspects of that behavior (e.g., queries and social media interactions) with consent in
the aggregate across many users has potential to assist in medical
discoveries [5] and enhance public health monitoring [2].

REFERENCES
[1] Fox, S. and Duggan, M. (2013). Health Online 2013. Pew Internet and American Life Project. Available from
http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2013/Health-online.aspx
[2] Paul, M.J. and Dredze, M. (2011). You are what you tweet:
Analyzing Twitter for public health. Proc. ICWSM, 265–272.
[3] Tang, T.T., Hawking, D., Craswell, N., and Griffiths, K.
(2005). Focused crawling for both topical relevance and
quality of medical information. Proc. CIKM, 147–154.
[4] White, R.W. and Horvitz, E. (2009). Cyberchondria: Studies
of the escalation of medical concerns in web search. TOIS,
27(4): 23.
[5] White, R.W., Tatonetti, N., Shah, N., Altman, R., and
Horvitz, E. (2013). Web-scale pharmacovigilance: Listening
to signals from the crowd. JAMIA, 20(3): 404–408.

The monitoring and use of health-related online behavior also
brings into sharper focus important tradeoffs between privacy and
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07.

1138

