Multimedia Recommendation: Technology and Techniques
Jialie Shen†
†

Meng Wang‡

Shuicheng Yan?

Peng Cui∗

Singapore Management University, Singapore

jlshen@smu.edu.sg
‡

Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, China

?

National University of Singapore, Singapore

eric.mengwang@gmail.com
∗

eleyans@nus.edu.sg
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn
Categories and Subject Descriptors

2.

H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Information Search
and Retrieval

This tutorial is devoted to scholars and industry practitioners
working on information retrieval, multimedia information management, machine learning and data mining applications as well as
those people that would like to get aware of the research field of
multimedia recommendation and their major real applications. The
tutorial consists of five core sections, and it is structured as follows,

General Terms
Algorithms, Performance, Theory

• Introduction and Overview: The tutorial will start with a variety of vivid examples demonstrating why effective recommendation is so important for Web scale multimedia search
and sharing. Then, we discuss a few important issues that
are most relevant to recommender system design and evaluation. They include long tail, information overload and user
behavior.

Keywords
Multimedia, Recommendation

1.

TUTORIAL OVERVIEW

INTRODUCTION

In recent years, we have witnessed a rapid growth in the availability of digital multimedia on various application platforms and
domains. Consequently, the problem of information overload has
become more and more serious. In order to tackle the challenge,
various multimedia recommendation technologies have been developed by different research communities (e.g., multimedia systems, information retrieval, machine learning and computer version). Meanwhile, many commercial web systems (e.g., Flick,
YouTube, and Last.fm) have successfully applied recommendation
techniques to provide users personalized content and services in a
convenient and flexible way.
When looking back, the information retrieval (IR) community
has a long history of studying and contributing recommender system design and related issues. It has been proven that the recommender systems can effectively assist users in handling information
overload and provide high-quality personalization. While several
courses were dedicated to multimedia retrieval in the recent decade,
to the best of our knowledge, the tutorial is the first one specifically
focusing on multimedia recommender systems and their applications on various domains and media contents. We plan to summarize the research along this direction and provide an impetus for
further research on this important topic.

• Image and Video Recommendation: We examine current commercial systems and research prototypes, focusing on comparing the advantages and the disadvantages of the various
strategies and schemes.
• Go beyond Visual Data: Music Recommendation: The importance of music recommendation is discussed firstly. Next,
a few fundamental topics (e.g., user modeling, major business models, algorithm design, large scale system evaluation
and key applications) will be explored in detail.
• Personalization and Contextualization: The majority of existing multimedia recommendation systems focuses on recommending the most relevant items to individual users and
generally ignores any contextual information. We discuss
what kind of role contextual information can play in building
personalized multimedia recommendation. We also examine
the approach to estimate individual preference and analyze
contextual information.
• Summarization and Conclusion: Multimedia recommendation is a very exciting research area. After reviewing recent
technical developments, this section aims to explore a set of
open issues for the future study and potential solutions.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage, and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s). Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07.

1131

