SIGIR 2013 Workshop on Time Aware Information Access
(#TAIA2013)
Fernando Diaz
fdiaz@microsoft.com
Kira Radinsky
kira@salespredict.com

Susan Dumais
Miles Efron
sdumais@microsoft.com
mefron@illinois.edu
Maarten de Rijke
Milad Shokouhi
derijke@uva.nl
milads@microsoft.com

ABSTRACT
Web content increasingly reflects the current state of the
physical and social world, manifested both in traditional
news media sources along with user-generated publishing
sites such as Twitter, Foursquare, and Facebook. At the
same time, web searching increasingly reflects problems grounded
in the real world. As a result of this blending of the web with
the real world, we observe that the web, both in its composition and use, has incorporated many of the dynamics of the
real world. Few of the problems associated with searching
dynamic collections are well understood, such as defining
time-sensitive relevance, understanding user query behavior over time and understanding why certain web content
changes.
We believe that, just as static collections often benefit
from modeling topics, dynamic collections will likely benefit
from temporal modeling of events and time-sensitive user
interests and intents, which were rarely addressed in the literature. There have been preliminary efforts in the research
and industrial communities to address algorithms, architectures, evaluation methodologies and metrics.
We aim to bring together practitioners and researchers to
discuss their recent breakthroughs and the challenges with
addressing time-aware information access, both from the algorithmic and the architectural perspectives.
This workshop is a successor to the successful SIGIR 2012
Workshop on Time Aware Information Access (#TAIA2012).1
Where the 2012 edition was the first to bring together a
broad set of academic and industrial researchers around the
topic of time-aware information access, the specific focus of
this workshop is on the many time-aware benchmarking activities that are ongoing in 2013.

1.

SCOPE

on evaluation and on the collaborative benchmarking activities that are happening this year:
• Temporal summarization (or works in progress for the
TREC 2013 task).
• Real-time search (or works in progress for the TREC
2013 task), including, real-time trends in social circles, real time events vs. real time queries, aggregated
search answers for real-time searches, and other related
issues.
• Dynamic information extraction and updating (or works
in progress for TREC 2013 Knowledge Base Acceleration (KBA) and Temporal Summarization tracks).
Research questions include: How can these tasks be approached? Are they measuring the right thing? What do
they teach us? What is missing?
In addition, TAIA 2013 solicited contributions on the following issues that complement today’s benchmarking activities and that may inform future versions of these activities:
• Publicly available dynamic collections (e.g. Wikipedia
edits, Wikipedia page requests, Twitter and news streams).
• Evaluation methodologies for time-sensitive tasks.
• Timeline creations and summarizations
• Temporal natural language processing tasks and techniques
• Time-sensitive ranking, including, effective ranking for
time-sensitive queries, optimizing for both freshness
and relevance, evaluating the results for time sensitive
queries, etc.
• Temporal changes in document contents.

We solicited submissions related to all aspects of timesensitive information access. TAIA 2013 has a special focus

• Understanding Web dynamics, including trends and
other temporal analysis on web and social graphs.

1

http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/people/milads/
taia2012.aspx

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07.

1137

