EuroHCIR2013 - the 3rd European Workshop on HumanComputer Interaction and Information Retrieval
Max L. Wilson

Birger Larsen

Preben Hansen

Mixed Reality Lab
University of Nottingham, UK

The Royal School of Library
and Information Science, Denmark

University of Stockholm
Stockholm, Sweden

max.wilson@nottingham.ac.uk
Kristian Norling

blar@iva.dk

preben@dsv.su.se
Tony Russell-Rose

Norling & Company Ltd, Sweden

UXLabs, UK

kristian@norling.co

tgr@uxlabs.co.uk

ABSTRACT

2. MOTIVATION & APPROPRIATENESS

A proposal summary for the EuroHCIR workshop at SIGIR2013.

Our particular motivation for holding the 3rd EuroHCIR at SIGIR
is to more purposefully engage the core IR community. The
previous two workshops have engaged the human-focused
communities well, and led to many design and human-evaluation
papers, but fewer IR measure and systems papers. One notable
exception was Smucker & Clarke’s introduction to Time-Based
Gain measure [2], which is the sort of paper that we’d like to
encourage in 2013. Further, EuroHCIR naturally lures researchers
from the HCI and IIR communities, and so hosting EuroHCIR at
SIGIR helps bring those people to the IR community. The reverse
has so far been less successful. Consequently, we propose that the
combination of EuroHCIR at SIGIR is a crucial step towards
creating a space to encourage more IR and HCI integration.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Search process.
H.5.2 [User Interfaces]: Interaction styles

Keywords
Human-computer interaction, information retrieval, HCIR.

1. THEME & PURPOSE
The purpose of EuroHCIR is to push the agenda of understanding
the role that HCI has with IR systems, beyond Interactive IR.
Alongside the popular American HCIR series, EuroHCIR aims to
stimulate this focus in the large European community. While the
previous two workshops have taken place at more HCI focused
conferences (BCS-HCI and IIiX2012), the particular purpose of
running EuroHCIR2013 at SIGIR2013 is to better engage with the
core IR community, on extended search scenarios like holiday
planning, entertainment, and casual browsing. Engaging with the
IR community is extremely timely, amongst the context of the
recent NII Shonan meeting on whole-session IR evaluation
(organised by Dumais, Belkin, Sanderson, and Kando), and the
similarly focused forthcoming Dagstuhl in 2013.

2.1 Workshop Goals
The EuroHCIR workshops have three main goals:

HCIR, or Human-Computer Information Retrieval, is a phrase
coined by Marchionini in 2005 [1] and is representative of the
growing interest in uniting both those who are interested in how
information systems are built (IR community) and those who are
interested in how humans search for information (HCI and
Information Seeking). The two fields have both developed
innovative techniques to support search, but their insights often do
not bridge disciplinary borders.

1.

Present and discuss novel HCIR designs, systems, and
findings.

2.

Identify and unite European researchers and industry
professionals working in this area.

3.

Facilitate and encourage collaboration and joint
academic and industry ventures.

EuroHCIR2013 at SIGIR2013 has a specific 4th goal:
4.

Engage directly with the IR community

2.2 Topics
The following topics are common to the HCIR events but have
been re-prioritised to engage the IR community:

Five increasingly popular workshops and an NSF funded event
brought focus to this multi-disciplinary issue in the USA; HCIR
became a 2-day symposium in 2012. In Europe, we have had 2
increasingly successful workshops. EuroHCIR2013 builds on the
worldwide momentum and focuses on the developing HCIR
community in Europe.



IR systems for extended sessions (e.g. holiday planning,
entertainment, and casual browsing)



Simulation of extended IR sessions and tasks



Modelling and evaluation of HCIR / IR



Novel interaction techniques for IR



Exploratory search and information discovery



Application of HCI techniques to IR in specific domains

3. REFERENCES

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other
uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07.

[1] G. Marchionini. Toward human-computer information
retrieval. ASIST Bulletin, 32(5):20, 2006.
[2] M. Smucker and C. Clarke. The fault, dear researchers, is not
in cranfield, but in our metrics, that they are unrealistic. In
EuroHCIR2012, pages 11–12, 2012.

1139

