Diversity and Novelty in Information Retrieval
Rodrygo L. T. Santos

Pablo Castells

Univ. Federal de Minas Gerais
Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil

Univ. Autónoma de Madrid
Madrid, Spain

rodrygo@dcc.ufmg.br

Ismail Sengor Altingovde

pablo.castells@uam.es
Fazli Can

Middle East Technical University
Ankara, Turkey

Bilkent University
Ankara, Turkey

altingovde@ceng.metu.edu.tr

canf@cs.bilkent.edu.tr

ABSTRACT

particular, we will cover the motivations, as well as the most
established approaches for producing and evaluating diverse
results in the context of search engines, recommender systems, and data streams. By contrasting the state-of the-art
in these multiple domains, this tutorial aims to derive a
common understanding of the diversification problem and
the existing solutions, their commonalities and differences,
as a means to foster new research directions.
In particular, the tutorial attendees will:

This tutorial aims to provide a unifying account of current
research on diversity and novelty in different IR domains,
namely, in the context of search engines, recommender systems, and data streams.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information
Search and Retrieval—search process

• understand the importance and complexities of achieving diversity/novelty for various IR domains;

Keywords

• learn the state-of-the-art approaches for diversity/novelty
in search results, documents and streaming data, and
recommender systems;

Relevance, Diversity, Novelty, Ambiguity, Redundancy

1.

OVERVIEW

• learn the fundamental evaluation metrics and have an
overview of past and current evaluation campaigns

Information retrieval has been traditionally approached as
a pursuit of relevant information, under the assumption that
the users’ information needs are unambiguously conveyed by
their information requests. While such an assumption may
have arguably held in the library setting where the early
studies of relevance-oriented ranking were conducted, it does
not hold in general, and it is unlikely to hold in particular for
the multitude of users’ needs in modern information retrieval
systems, such as search engines and recommender systems.
In order to identify relevant information under the uncertainty posed by the users’ requests, an effective approach is
to diversify the retrieved results. By doing so, an IR system can minimise the chance of wrongly guessing the users’
needs, which may cause the users to abandon their retrieval
task.
Through a stream of active research and experiences, diversity and novelty can be said to have by now consolidated
into a significant body of techniques, methodologies, theories, and knowledge in the field of information retrieval.
This tutorial aims to provide a unifying account of current
research on diversity and novelty in different IR domains. In

• get an overview of other related application areas that
include query suggestions, image search, aggregated
search, spatial object retrieval;
• obtain a unified view of the topic as a take-away message; i.e., the connections between various methods
employed in different domains as well as the differences
between them.

2.

TUTORIAL OUTLINE
1. Practical and Theoretical Background
2. Diversity in Search
• Implicit and Explicit Diversification Approaches
• Diversity Evaluation
3. Diversity in Recommendation
• Problem Statement
• Novelty and Diversity Enhancement
• Novelty and Diversity Evaluation

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s).
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07.

4. Diversity in Documents and Streams
• Document-level Novelty
• Novelty and Diversification of Document Streams
• Evaluation
5. Other Application Areas

1130

