Exploration, Navigation and Retrieval of Information in
Cultural Heritage ENRICH 2013
Séamus Lawless
Owen Conlan
Knowledge and Data
Engineering Group
Trinity College Dublin
Ireland
+353 1 896 1765

Maristella Agosti

Paul Clough

Department of Information
Engineering
University of Padua
Italy
+39 049 827 7650

Information School
University of Sheffield
United Kingdom
+44 114 222 2664

agosti@dei.unipd.it

p.d.clough@sheffield.ac.uk

{seamus.lawless,
owen.conlan}@scss.tcd.ie
This workshop investigates the enhanced retrieval of, and
interaction with, cultural heritage collections. We are interested in
investigating innovative forms of personalised, multi-lingual IR,
which can include:

ABSTRACT
The Exploration, Navigation and Retrieval of Information in
Cultural Heritage Workshop (ENRICH 2013) offers a forum to 1)
discuss the challenges and opportunities in Information Retrieval
research in the area of Cultural Heritage; 2) encourage
collaboration between researchers engaged in work in this
specialist area of Information Retrieval, and to foster the
formation of a research community; and 3) identify a set of
actions which the community should undertake to progress the
research agenda.





The workshop will foster a new stream of Information Retrieval
research and support the design of search tools that can help endusers fully exploit the wonderful Cultural Heritage material that is
available across the globe.

Content-aware retrieval which responds to the entities and
relationships contained within the artefacts and across
collections.
Personalised IR, exploration and presentation which responds
to models of user and contextual intent.
Community-aware retrieval which responds to wider
community activity, interest, contribution and experience.

Such new forms of enhanced IR require rigorous evaluation and
validation using appropriate metrics, contrasting digital cultural
heritage collections and diverse users and communities. This
workshop promotes such evaluation, taking into account the
specific requirements of the domain. The workshop also explores
the use of multilingual, multimodal and personalised IR
techniques and technologies to enable end-users to search in their
native language, but receive results collated from content
collections in numerous languages, all tailored for their
consumption. The nature of cultural heritage resources means that
content analysis in support of IR is of specific interest. This
includes the automated normalisation of historical texts, the use of
Natural Language Processing (NLP) for entity extraction and
metadata generation.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search
and Retrieval – Search Process

Keywords
Cultural Heritage, Digital Humanities, Information Retrieval

1. OVERVIEW
A key challenge facing the curators and providers of digital
cultural heritage worldwide is to instigate, increase and enhance
engagement with their collections. To achieve this, a fundamental
change in the way these artefacts can be discovered, explored and
contributed to by users and communities is required. Cultural
heritage artefacts are digital representations of primary resources:
manuscript collections, paintings, books, photographs etc. The
text-based resources are often innately “noisy”, contain nonstandard spelling, poor punctuation and obsolete grammar and
word forms. Image-based resources often have limited associated
metadata which describes the resources and their content. In
addition, the information needs and tasks of cultural heritage
users are often complex and diverse, evolving through
information exploration and discovery. This presents a specific set
of challenges to traditional Information Retrieval (IR) techniques
and approaches.

The ENRICH workshop promotes the exchange of ideas between
researchers working on the theory and foundations of IR, cross
and multi-lingual IR, personalised search and recommender
systems. There are numerous research areas that can support such
improved retrieval and exploration in the area of cultural heritage.
Relevant topics include, but are not limited to: Multilingual
semantic search; Context-aware and semantic recommender
systems; Adaptation engines and algorithms for personalised
multilingual IR; User modelling and adaptation; Content
personalisation and personalised result presentation; Domain
modelling; External knowledge resources for IR; Evaluation
methodologies and metrics for personalised multilingual IR;
Information Extraction, Data Mining and Natural Language
Processing; and Social Network Analysis.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this
work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07.

1136

