The Role of Current Working Context in Professional
Search
Maya Sappelli

TNO and Radboud University Nijmegen,
The Netherlands

m.sappelli@cs.ru.nl

Categories and Subject Descriptors

contexts the user works in. Additionally, we aim to seperate
the internal view (how the user describes himself) from the
external view (how the user is described by his colleagues).
Understanding the diﬀerences between the two may help to
deﬁne the user model. Initial work in which users have assessed their personal user model shows the limitations of
current methods [3].
The second goal is to evaluate the user model in the context of tools that assist knowledge workers in managing their
information ﬂow. We aim to do this eventually in a smallscale ﬁeld study with a complete information support application. In the mean time we will compare various types
of user models in their performance on the same task. We
will mainly look at their performance on search tasks [4] and
email classiﬁcation tasks (i.e. categorization [2], importance
of the message, relevance of the message to the context). It
is interesting to look at both types of tasks, since they both
have diﬀerent characteristics and may need diﬀerent parts
of the user model. We will focus on using various term extraction techniques and temporal aspects, such as changes
in interests over time.
In recent research [1] we have collected a dataset of user
activities during typical knowledge worker’s tasks. We plan
to use these data for a series of experiments in which we
aim at improving professional search by taking the searcher’s
current context into account. In the doctoral consortium, I
hope to get advice on how to set-up experiments with this
data collection.

H.3.4 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Systems
and Software—Performance evaluation, User proﬁles and
alert services; I.2.7 [Artiﬁcial Intelligence]: Natural Language Processing—Text analysis, Language models

Keywords
Context recognition, Machine learning, User models
Today’s working world of knowledge workers is changing
rapidly. The available information that they need to process
is ever growing. In addition, the characteristics of their work
are changing as people can and do their work from home.
This has resulted in the need to support knowledge workers
in order to prevent burnouts. The project SWELL1 targets
this by developing systems that support user’s mental and
physical well-being at work and at home. In the PhD project
presented in this abstract we aim at maintaining well-being
at work through information support.The proposed research
will have two goals:
The ﬁrst goal is to optimize the user model, which should
capture what the user wants and needs in terms of information support. The model can be used to determine which
information is relevant for the user and his current activities. This should help ﬁlter information (e.g. persons, emails, documents) that are relevant to the user’s current
work activity without losing relevant or important information. We will mainly use textual data to describe the user,
but aim to mix this with other relevant data such as social
relations. One challenge will be to use data from diﬀerent
(textual) sources with various characteristics, together with
non-textual data to ﬁlter the information. This has proven
not to be straightforward [2]. Our aims are to develop a
user model that (a) describes the user well, (b) is intuitively
recognizable by the user, and (c) can be used to enhance
existing IR or classiﬁcation techniques. It will most likely
consist of several partial identities that correspond to the
1

Acknowledgements
This publication was supported by the Dutch national program COMMIT (project P7 SWELL).

1. REFERENCES
[1] S. Koldijk, M. Sappelli, M. Neerincx, and W. Kraaij.
Unobtrusive monitoring of knowledge workers for stress
self-regulation. In Proceedings of the 21th International
Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation and
Personalization, 2013.
[2] M. Sappelli, S. Verberne, and W. Kraaij. Using ﬁle system
content to organize e-mail. In Proceedings of the fourth
symposium on Information interaction in context, 2012.
[3] S. Verberne, M. Sappelli, and W. Kraaij. Term extraction for
user proﬁling: evaluation by the user. In Proceedings of the 21th
International Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation and
Personalization, 2013.
[4] S. Verberne, M. Sappelli, D. Ransgaard Sørensen, and W. Kraaij.
Personalization in professional academic search. In Workshop on
Integrating IR technologies for Professional Search, 2013.

http://www.swell-project.net

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07.

1148

