Group-Support for Task-Based Information Searching:
A Knowledge-Based Approach
Thilo Boehm
University of Hagen
58097 Hagen
Germany
thilo.boehm@fernuni-hagen.de
and their relation information. By linking the Information
Retrieval (IR) activities of the group members with the data
accessible through these tools, a knowledge-base (KB) is build up.
This KB is than utilized for inference of situational support for the
co-workers in every phase of the search process.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search
and Retrieval – Search Process. H.5.3 [Information Interfaces
and Presentation]: Group and Organization Interfaces –
Collaborative computing, Computer-supported cooperative work.

Previous research in the field of collaborative IS&S has
conceptualized, implemented and evaluated tools and systems for
use at each stage of the information searching process: (1) query
construction, (2) obtaining results, and (3) evaluating and using
the results. However, these systems do not provide information on
the best suited collaboration partners and the collaborative activity
to be performed to increase the effectiveness of the collaborative
performance of IS&S tasks.

General Terms
Algorithms, Design, Human Factors

Keywords
Collaborative information seeking, group support, user support
In various work domains, the collaborative performance of a work
task by a team can lead to a shared information need required to
fulfill this task. Many empirical studies identified collaborative
information seeking and searching (IS&S) as everyday work
patterns in order to solve a shared information need and to benefit
from the diverse expertise and experience of the team members.
Such studies have been conducted, for example, in the field of
engineering and design [1], and the patent domain [2], to name a
few.

To close this gap, in the proposed research a group support system
(GSS) on top of the KB will be developed. This GSS aims at
increasing the group performance by (1) encouraging query
diversity, (2) providing already discovered information, and (3)
facilitating the alignment of result assessment. Based on semantic
link analysis, the GSS suggests the best suited collaborative
activity to be performed by a co-worker in terms of search
effectiveness of the group.

In everyday work practices, collaboration is realized by utilizing a
broad range of software tools. Recent empirical studies show that,
despite the increasing availability of tools that are specifically
designed to support collaborative IS&S, these technologies are not
used in practice [3]. Instead, simpler communication technologies
that are part of the everyday work are used as means to realize
collaborative IS&S. These tools build a heterogeneous
collaboration environment along with the users. However, current
collaborative IS&S solutions do not consider the usage of these
tools as well as information produced or managed with these
tools, even though they provide potentially valuable awareness
information.

As basis for my research approach it is planned to extend the
ezDL
system
(Easy
Access
to
Digital
Libraries:
http://www.ezdl.de) by collaborative features as well as the KBbased group support system. In a user study run at the distance
learning university at Hagen I will evaluate the developed system
and identify to which extend collaboration support in form of
suggested activities can improve the synergetic effects [4] of the
collaborative performance of IS&S tasks.

REFERENCES
[1] Bruce, H. et al. 2003. A comparison of the collaborative
information retrieval behaviour of two design teams. The
New Review of Information Behaviour Research. 4, 1 (2003),
139–153.

Besides the textual content created and managed by the tools in
use, users also interact with each other in many ways and in this
way build collaboration networks. In the proposed research, I
investigate an approach which exploits these heterogeneous
collaboration environments and such networks by collecting
semantic knowledge from the utilized tools about the individuals

[2] Hansen, P. and Järvelin, K. 2005. Collaborative information
retrieval in an information-intensive domain. Information
Processing & Management. 41, 5 (2005), 1101–1119.
[3] Morris, M.R. 2013. Collaborative search revisited.
Proceedings of the 2013 conference on Computer supported
cooperative work (New York, NY, USA, 2013), 1181–1192.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other
uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07.

[4] Shah, C. and González-Ibáñez, R. 2011. Evaluating the
synergic effect of collaboration in information seeking.
Proceedings of the 34th international ACM SIGIR
conference on Research and development in Information
Retrieval (New York, NY, USA, 2011), 913–922.

1141

