Beyond Relevance: On Novelty and Diversity in Tag
∗
Recommendation
Fabiano Muniz Belém

Computer Science Department - Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Brazil

fmuniz@dcc.ufmg.br

ABSTRACT

example, consider a list of recommended tags given to a user
u to describe an object o, in which all terms are related to o’s
content, but all of them are synonyms. Moreover, suppose
that these terms have already been used by u to describe
o. In both cases, although the recommended tags have high
relevance, they are less interesting and useful than a more diverse list of terms that bring novel information for the given
object and user. Moreover, as we argued in [1], objects on
the Web 2.0 may be multifaceted, being related to various
topics, thus requiring more diversified tags to cover these
topics. Thus, novelty and diversity are also key aspects for
recommended tags, besides relevance.
Our goal is to develop novel tag recommendation methods that consider novelty and diversity jointly with relevance. We have already proposed and evaluated two different strategies. Our first approach extends a state-of-the-art
tag recommender based on Genetic Programming to include
novelty and diversity metrics both as attributes and in the
objective function [1]. This approach captures the novelty
and diversity of a list of recommended tags implicitly, by introducing metrics that assess the semantic distance between
different tags (diversity) and the inverse of the popularity of
the tag in the application (novelty). Instead, inspired by [3],
our second strategy explicitly takes into account the possible topics (e.g., categories) underlying an object in order to
promote tags with high coverage of topics and low redundancy, thus raising diversity with respect to these topics.
We intend to extend these strategies to consider different
weights for novelty and diversity for different objects and
users, what is also still absent in the literature.
In sum, our goal is to address not only relevance, but also
novelty and diversity in tag recommendation. To reach this
goal, we intend to propose new metrics that estimate relevance, novelty and diversity of tags, as well as new tag recommendation strategies which simultaneously exploit these
aspects. Finally, we will perform experiments to evaluate
these strategies, comparing their results (also regarding the
three aspects) against state-of-the-art techniques, employing real data from popular Web 2.0 applications, such as
Bibsonomy, LastFM and YouTube.

We propose to explicitly exploit issues related to novelty and
diversity in tag recommendation tasks, an unexplored research avenue (only relevance issues have been investigated
so far), in order to improve user experience and satisfaction. We propose new tag recommendation strategies to
cover these issues and highlight the involved challenges.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.1 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Content
Analysis and Indexing

General Terms
Algorithms, Experimentation

Keywords
Tag Recommendation, Relevance, Novelty, Diversity

1.

RESEARCH OVERVIEW

Tags have become very popular on the Web 2.0 as they
facilitate and encourage users to create and share their own
content. In this context, there is a large interest in developing strategies to recommend tags to users, providing relevant
and useful tag suggestions for a target object, and improving the quality of the generated tags and, indirectly, of the
IR services that rely on them.
Recommendation systems have historically focused mostly
on maximizing the relevance of the recommended items. In
tag recommendation, particularly, relevance can be defined
from an object perspective, i.e., a relevant term describes
well the content of the target object, or from a personalized one, i.e., a relevant term describes correctly the target
content and satisfies the target user’s interests.
However, relevance by itself may not be enough to guarantee recommendation usefulness and effectiveness [2]. For
∗This work is supported by the INWeb (grant 57.3871/2008-6)
and by the authors grants from CNPq and FAPEMIG.

2. REFERENCES

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for prof t or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the f rst page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07.

[1] F. Belém, E. Martins, J. Almeida, and M. Gonçalves. Exploiting
relevance, novelty and diversity in tag recommendation. In
ECIR, 2013.
[2] S. Vargas and P. Castells. Rank and relevance in novelty and
diversity metrics for recommender systems. In RecSys, 2011.
[3] S. Vargas, P. Castells, and D. Vallet. Explicit relevance models
in intent-oriented information retrieval diversification. In SIGIR,
2012.

1140

