Task Differentiation for Personal Search Evaluation
Seyedeh Sargol Sadeghi
School of Computer Science &
Information Technology
RMIT University
Melbourne, Australia

seyedeh.sadeghi@rmit.edu.au
Participants rated the differences between each pair of tasks
answering the question “To what extent do you think that the
difference between these two tasks will affect the way you search
for the information described in the tasks?”. Responses were
indicated using a 5-level ordinal scale with the categories “Not at
all”, “Slightly”, “Moderately”, “Very”, and “Extremely”, which
were mapped to the integer values 1-5.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: [Information Search
and Retrieval]

Keywords

1

2

3

4

5

Personal Search Task, Search Features, Evaluation.

B1

B2

B3

F1

F2

F3

F4

F5

F6

F7

F8

F9

F10

F11

F12

F13

F14

F15

F16

F17

F18

F19

F20

F21

B5

B4

B6

Figure 1. Comparisons between mean categories of feature’s effect in differentiating tasks (Bi: Bounds, Fi: Feature settings).
F1:
F2:
F3:
F4:
F5:
F6:
F7:

Role of the user (receiver vs. sender)
Access recency (week vs. month)
Information repetition (single vs. duplicated)
Temporal search context (urgent vs. not-urgent)
Access recency (day vs. week)
Sender frequency (frequent-sender vs. rare-sender)
Access recency (month vs. day)

F8: Thread of target information (conversation vs. single-message)
F9: Information granularity (multi-item vs. one-item)
F10: Number of viewed messages (certainty vs. uncertainty)
F11: Remembering other recipients (remembered vs. not-remembered)
F12: Information granularity (one-item vs. lookup)
F13: Access frequency (rare vs. frequent)
F14: Information location (body vs. attachment)

Extended Abstract

F15: Remembering received date (not-remembered vs. remembered)
F16: Information granularity (lookup vs. multi-item)
F17: Search strategy (search vs. browse)
F18: Search goal (forwarding vs. collecting)
F19: Uniqueness of the topic of target information (not-unique vs. unique)
F20: Remembering search topic (not-remembered vs. remembered)
F21: Remembering sender (remembered vs. not-remembered)

A range of features were found to influence user perceptions of
task differences. To compare the effect of features against each
other, a set of obvious paired tasks are used to identify bound
points for the range of acquired results (Figure 1). If the
distribution of responses for the obvious similar paired tasks is
significantly different from a paired task under examination, it
can be concluded that the underlying feature setting of that paired
task is significantly effective in indicating task differences. The
same analysis can be applied for task similarities. Based on this
analysis, although some features appeared to be at the medium
level of effect, there were other features with discriminative
power in task differentiation (for example, remembering the
sender of message, F21 in Figure 1, can make distinctive
differences, while access recency of week vs. month, F2, can have
similar effects and lead to comparability).

The aim of this thesis is to make the evaluation of personal search
systems more feasible. Research in this area is hampered in part
due to the lack of comparability and diverse coverage of varied
tasks across different users. Addressing these issues requires more
knowledge on the landscape of personal search tasks, and
differentiating the tasks of different individuals.
The proposed approach in this research relies on identifying the
differences between search tasks in terms of their effect on user
and system performance. Although personal tasks are varied and
dependent on users, it is possible to differentiate tasks by
considering their common underlying features. As a preliminary
study, an experiment was conducted to measure user perceptions
of such differences across pairs of typical search tasks, grouped
by an underlying feature.

We aim to investigate the effect of features on user and system
performance. These explorations can help us to establish a
reference model of the discriminative power of task features,
which can be further extended for identifying task similarities and
differences. This will alleviate the lack of comparability and
facilitate diverse coverage of varied personal tasks for evaluation
experiments.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this
work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07.

1147

