How Far Will You Go? Characterizing and Predicting
Online Search Stopping Behavior using Information Scent
and Need for Cognition
Wan-Ching Wu

3rd Author

School of Information & Library Science
3rd author's affiliation
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
1st line of address
Chapel Hill, NC, 27599 USA
2nd line of address
919-360-3212
Telephone number, incl. country code

wanchinw@live.unc.edu

3rd E-mail

Specifically, when the information scent pattern is persistent
instead of discontinued on the first SERP, searchers may be more
inclined to continue exploring the current search result set.
Similarly, when making a decision about when to stop searching
for a task, the first SERP one encounters may indicate how
difficult it will be to retrieve useful information, which might
subsequently influence how persistent searchers are with a task.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search
and Retrieval---search process

Keywords
Information scent, need for cognition, search stopping behavior

Variations in when a person decides to stop searching might also
be caused by individual differences. While some people avoid
expending cognitive effort when searching, others have a greater
desire to be thorough. Such an individual difference in tendency
to engage in effortful cognitive activities can be explained by a
personality trait: Need for Cognition [1]. Research has shown that
NFC has a positive relationship with the amount of cognitive
effort put to a task. In the context of online searching which is
often a cognitive demanding activity, NFC can potentially be
useful for explaining why certain searchers stop early than others.

1. ABSTRACT
Predicting when online searchers terminate search for information
tasks without obvious end-points is a challenging task. Previous
research concludes that people stop based on intuitions of enough
[4], yet few studies have systematically examined online search
stopping behavior. For open-ended search tasks, searchers often
have to reformulate their queries in order to obtain a sufficient
amount of information, which means that before searchers quit
searching for a task entirely (stopping at the task level), they also
stop result evaluation for different queries during the search
(stopping at the query level).

Two mixed-factorial laboratory experiments are proposed to
examine (1) whether there is an effect of information scent level,
manipulated by placing different numbers of relevant search
results on the first SERP (one, three, five, and seven documents),
and (2) whether there is an effect of information scent pattern,
manipulated by changing the ranking of four relevant search
results (Four levels: persistent, disrupted, bursting, and delayed),
on search stopping behavior at both the query and the task level.
In both studies, whether the personality trait, NFC (Two levels:
High vs. Low), has an effect on search stopping behavior, and
whether it moderates the effect of information scent level and
pattern on search stopping behavior will also be investigated. The
findings of the studies are expected to help with the generation of
models of search stopping behavior and informing system designs
that encourage more thorough search result evaluation and
prevent premature search stopping.

When searchers stop evaluating results at the query level and the
task level can potentially be explained by the theory of
information scent [3]. Previous work shows that searchers decide
which links to follow based on different information scents, such
as anchor text and snippet. When making a decision about
whether to reformulate, the first search engine results page
(SERP) can be viewed as the information scent of all returned
results; searchers may predict the potential value of the set of
search results based on the characteristics of the initial SERP.
Card et al. [2] found that the information scent of the homepage
of a site is positively correlated with how long a searcher stayed
on the site. By the same analogy, the information scent level of
the first SERP can possibly predict how long a searcher will stay
on a set of search results. When more relevant search results are
present, it is likely to give the impression that more relevant
results can be found beyond the first SERP; searchers are
therefore more likely to continue searching. Furthermore, Card et
al. [2] has also found that as searchers navigated a series of
Webpages within a Website, when the information scent declined,
searchers tended to leave the Website. This result also seems to
suggest that the information scent distribution matters.

2. REFERENCES
[1] Cacioppo, J., Petty, R., & Kao, C. (1984). The efficient
assessment of need for cognition. Journal of Personality
Assessment, 48, 306–307.
[2] Card, S., Pirolli, P., Van Der Wege, M. M., Morrison, et al.
(2001). Information scent as a driver of Web behavior
graphs: results of a protocol analysis method for Web
usability. CHI’01, Seattle, WA, 498-505.
[3] Pirolli, P., & Card, S. (1999). Information foraging.
Psychological Review, 106(4), 643–675.
[4] Zach, L. (2005). When is “enough” enough? Modeling the
information-seeking and stopping behavior of senior arts
administrators. JASIST, 56(1), 23–35.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other
uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07.

1149

