Aggregated Search Interface Preferences
in Multi-Session Search Tasks
Marc Bron

Jasmijn van Gorp

Frank Nack

ISLA, University of Amsterdam

TViT, Utrecht University

ISLA, University of Amsterdam

m.m.bron@uva.nl
j.vangorp@uu.nl
nack@uva.nl
Lotte Belice Baltussen
Maarten de Rijke
Netherlands Institute
for Sound & Vision

ISLA, University of Amsterdam

lbbaltussen@beeldengeluid.nl

derijke@uva.nl

ABSTRACT

1.

Aggregated search interfaces provide users with an overview of
results from various sources. Two general types of display exist:
tabbed, with access to each source in a separate tab, and blended,
which combines multiple sources into a single result page. Multisession search tasks, e.g., a research project, consist of multiple
stages, each with its own sub-tasks. Several factors involved in
multi-session search tasks have been found to influence user search
behavior. We investigate whether user preference for source presentation changes during a multi-session search task.
The dynamic nature of multi-session search tasks makes the design of a controlled experiment a non-trivial challenge. We adopt a
methodology based on triangulation and conduct two types of observational study: a longitudinal study and a laboratory study. In
the longitudinal study we follow the use of tabbed and blended displays by 25 students during a project. We find that while a tabbed
display is used more than a blended display, subjects repeatedly
switch between displays during the project. Use of the tabbed display is motivated by a need to zoom in on a specific source, while
the blended display is used to explore available material across
sources whenever the information need changes.
In a laboratory study 44 students completed a multi-session search
task composed of three sub-tasks, the first with a tabbed display,
the second and third with blended displays. The tasks were manipulated by either providing three task about the same topic or about
three different topics. We find that a stable information need over
multiple sub-tasks negatively influences perceived usability of the
blended displays, while we do not find an influence when the information need changes.

In today’s information society, organizations such as census bureaus, news companies, and archives, are making their collections
of high quality information accessible through individual search interfaces [22]. As these sources are rarely indexed by major web
search engines, seeking for information across these sources requires users to sequentially go through each of them individually.
Aggregated search interfaces are a solution to this problem; they
provide users with an overview of the results from various sources
(verticals) by collecting and presenting information from multiple
collections. Two general types of aggregated search interfaces exist: tabbed and blended. Tabbed interfaces provide access to each
source in separate tabs, while blended interfaces combine multiple
sources into a single result page [20].
The focus of previous work on aggregated search interfaces has
been on selecting which vertical to present given a query and where
to present it in the result list based on click logs [24], judgements [2,
3, 23] or on simulations [18]. Others have investigated how users
interact with aggregated search interfaces, i.e., how verticals influence user search behavior [1] or the influence of tabbed and blended
interfaces on user behavior and preferences in single-session tasks
of varying complexity [4, 28, 29].
A multi-session search task, such as writing a report, consists of
multiple information seeking tasks, each of which might be composed of its own sub-tasks [10]. Several factors involved in multisession search tasks have been found to influence user search behavior. Such factors include: stages in the overall task, user search
experience, user knowledge of the search topic, and complexity of
individual sub-tasks [5, 9, 14, 17, 31, 34, 35].
Research also shows that users apply the display which they
feel will be most effective and efficient in solving their task [19].
For multi-session research tasks this means that the preference for
a tabbed or blended interface might alter between sub-tasks, depending on the user’s idiosyncratic needs. This potential alteration
is problematic for interface designers, because the prediction of
which vertical to show, where, and how, requires an understanding of the relationship between the presentation options of each
interface type, the user needs, and the performed sub-tasks.
We investigate whether user preference for source presentation
changes during a multi-session search task with the following research questions: (1) Do users switch between tabbed and blended
display types during a multi-session search task and what is the motivation to switch between display types? (2) Do changes in users’
information need across sub-tasks influence preference for a particular display type? And (3) what other factors are related to changes
in display preference during a multi-session search task?

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Search process; H.5.2
[User Interfaces]: Evaluation/methodology

Keywords
Search interface preferences, search behavior, aggregated search,
multi-session search tasks
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request
permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07 ...$15.00.

123

INTRODUCTION

1

We focus our investigation on research tasks in the humanities, as
the data sources investigated in this domain can be very diverse
and the behavior of repeatedly re-visiting sources that one encounters here naturally requires multi-session search. Importantly, while
there is a general focus on text-based media, the domain increasingly makes use of other media types too. An example here is the
field of media studies, where finding answers to hypotheses as part
of the paper writing process relies on the inspection of audio-visual
media, (through metadata or content-based), related metadata and
secondary literature [8].
The dynamic nature of multi-session search tasks make the design of a controlled experiment a non-trivial challenge. For the
research presented in this paper we adopt a methodology based on
triangulation [11] and conduct two types of studies: a longitudinal
study and a laboratory study. In our longitudinal study we follow
25 students during a four week research project. We provide students with an interface that allows switching between a tabbed display, blended display, and blended display with a find-similar functionality. This allows for the study of display use and switching in
a naturalistic setting. Through questionnaires and focus group discussions we elicitate the motivation for using a particular display.
In a laboratory study we present 44 students with a multi-session
search task consisting of three complex sub-tasks. Each sub-task is
carried out with a different display: the first task with the tabbed
display; the second task with the blended display; and the third
task with the blended display with a find-similar feature. We zoom
in on the influence of changes in information need associated with
recurring search sessions by manipulating whether a subject is assigned three sub-tasks about the same topic or three sub-tasks about
different topics. This allows us to investigate the factors associated with changes in information need and whether these influence
preference for a tabbed or blended display in different stages of a
multi-session search task.
In Section 2 we describe the three variants of the aggregated interface; Section 3 and 4 describe the experimental setup and results
of the longitudinal and laboratory study, respectively; in Section 5
we discuss the results of both studies in light of our research questions; Section 6 describes related work; we conclude in Section 7.

2.

5

BBC News - Al Gore: political paralysis over climate
15 Sep 2011 - Al Gore, the former vice president of America and

environmental campaigner, tells the BBC about his latest...
BBC - One Planet: An Interview with Al Gore
19 Sep 2011 - The Nobel laureate talks false science, oil addiction

and why victory is inevitable.
Gore: short-term mindset deep threat to sustainable...
2 Nov 2011 - Former U.S. Vice President Al Gore said
environment

Wednesday one of the biggest obstacles to investments in...

human interest
documentary

The rise and fall of Al Gore

news

17 Sep 2011 - His ideas got the whole world worried about planet's

sport

climate. Then, the Norwegian parliament bestowed Al Gore...
3

4

Figure 1: Tabbed display.
A single retrieval model may not be equally effective for each
collection due to differences in term statistics and the presence of
specific metadata fields in different collections [26]. To overcome
this issue we provide faceted search and query preview capabilities
in the aggregated search displays. These enable users to explore
and learn about the characteristics of individual collections [32].
We did not optimize a retrieval model for each collection as depending on the size of the test set and type of queries a bias may
be introduced towards particular types of documents, which is unwanted in a research task. The available facets depend on the collection as documents in some collections have rich metadata while
others do not. The interaction model behind the facet values operates as follows: values within a single facet are combined using
an OR operator, while values across facets are combined using an
AND operator [30].

2.2

Tabbed Display

The tabbed display mimics the functionality and layout of a typical web search engine and is the default display presented to the
user when opening the search interface. The tabbed display is
shown in Figure 1; we use numbers 1, . . . , 5 to reference specific
components in the display. It consists of: (1) a search box; (2) a
collection selection menu; (3) values for several facets; (4) a result
list; and (5) an option to select the tabbed or blended interface.
A search is initiated by submitting a query via the search box
(1). The television program collection is selected by default (2).
In response to a query 10 document snippets are shown for the selected collection on the result page (4). At the top of the result list
the number of documents found is displayed and at the bottom of
the page a pagination button enables moving to the next and further result pages. To further refine the results the top 5 values for
several facets are available (3). Pressing on the show more button
extends the list of facets up to the top 100. By selecting a different collection (2) results for this collection are displayed for the
current query. Each tab displays the same number of results (ten)
as a ranked list, five of which are generally visible above the fold
depending on the size of the display.
A document can be viewed by clicking on a result snippet. The
search result page is covered by an overlay and the content and
metadata of a document are displayed. There are two special cases
where the displayed information depends on the type of document,
i.e., image and Wiki. Records form the photo or tv-guide collections consist of several images; in the overlay the photo and its

AGGREGATED SEARCH DISPLAYS

An aggregated search interface provides access to multiple, often heterogeneous collections. In building an aggregated search
interface there are three aspects to consider: (i) how to retrieve relevant information from each vertical; (ii) which verticals to show;
and (iii) where to place the verticals on the screen. Below we first
give details of the back-end of our aggregated search interface and
then describe three types of aggregated search interface displays: a
tabbed display, a blended display and a blended display with findsimilar functionality.

2.1

2

Data and Retrieval Back-end

The theme of the course selected for our longitudinal study is
television history and the research projects carried out by the students are centered around television personalities between 1900
and 2010. To provide students with relevant material we obtained
six collections from several archives and libraries: (i) a television
program collection (metadata records for .5M programs); (ii) a
photo collection (20K photos); (iii) a Wiki dedicated to television
programs and presenters (20K pages); (iv) scanned television guides
(25K pages); (v) scanned news papers starting from 1900 till 1995
(6M articles); (vi) digital news papers starting from 1995 till 2010
(1M articles). Each collection was indexed using Lucene SOLR 4.0
and the retrieval model used was BM25.

124

1

2

2.4

3

An additional feature was added to the blended display and provided as an additional screen, i.e., similarity search. By clicking
on a document the user submits the current query and the first 100
words of the clicked document as an OR query [7, 27]. This type of
explicit feedback is often implemented in a digital library context
to discover related material across multiple sources [20]. However,
the additional effort of using this feature and lack of understanding
of how it works limits the use of find-similar like features [6, 33].
We add this feature to the blended display in order to explore its
use in multi-session search tasks.
By clicking the find-similar button a query is issued and the document used for the query is placed in the query history pane appearing as a new row above the first row of search results. There
are four slots, one of which is filled each time the find-similar button is clicked ordered from newest to oldest. When all slots are
occupied the oldest document is removed and the others shifted to
the right to free up space for the new document. Whenever a new
query is issued the query history is emptied by removing the top
row. Note that without clicking the find-similar button the similarity search display is exactly the same as the blended display.

TV-catalogue
BBC News - Al Gore:
political paralysis over
climate
15 Sep 2011 - Al Gore,
the former vice
president of America
and environmental
campaigner, tells the
BBC about his latest...

BBC News - One
Planet: An Interview
with Al Gore
19 Sep 2011 - The
Nobel laureate talks
false science, oil
addiction and why
victory is inevitable.

Gore: short-term
mindset deep threat to
sustainable...
2 Nov 2011 - Former
U.S. Vice President Al
Gore said Wednesday
one of the biggest
obstacles to
investments in

Similarity Search

The rise and fall of Al
Gore
17 Sep 2011 - His ideas

got the whole world
worried about planet's
climate. Then, the
Norwegian parliament
bestowed Al Gore ...

Photo Collection

Programme Guides

Figure 2: Blended display.

3.

metadata are show with the additional option of viewing the next
or previous photo without leaving the overlay. Wiki page content
is not shown in the overlay, only the metadata and a link that opens
the page in a new tab. To save a particular document a bookmark
button is available, when hovering over a search results and in the
document view overlay. Clicking the bookmark button saves the
title of the document to a bookmark list available as a drop down
list at the top of the screen. Selecting a title from the drop down list
triggers an overlay with the document.

2.3

A LONGITUDINAL STUDY

The goal of our first, longitudinal study was to investigate in
which way people change between interfaces for a given work task
in a natural setting and how this swapping behavior can be motivated, if it happens at all. The type of multi-session work task we
make use of is a scholarly task, i.e., the task of writing a paper,
which covers multiple search tasks to be carried out to collect and
investigate the material that finally contributes to the paper [15].
Below we first describe the details of our experimental setting followed by an analysis of the data and discussion of the findings.

Blended Display

3.1

The blended display is based on the layout of interfaces typically
used within digital libraries [25]. The blended display is shown in
Figure 2; we use numbers 1, . . . , 3 to reference specific components
in the display. It consists of: (1) a search box; and six horizontally
orientated rectangular panes one for each collection. The vertical
order in which the six collections are displayed is fixed and is the
same as the order of the collection selection menu in the tabbed
display, e.g., the top most pane shows results for the television program collection. Within a collection pane four results are shown
ordered from left (most relevant) to right (less relevant) (2). To
free up screen space for displaying results horizontally the facets
for each collection are hidden. A button is available to toggle the
display of facet values (3). The facets, bookmark options and document views are all the same as in the tabbed interface.
The blended display presents six by four results of which eight
are generally visible above the fold depending on display size. More
results are available as each source provides an independent pagination button. By scrolling down more results are available than
in the tabbed display, however, only four results are available from
each source. This is a trade-off between the two display types. The
tabbed display supports searching through a single source, while
the blended display supports searching through multiple sources.
In our blended display we use a fixed order and fixed number of
results. This is in contrast to a trend seen in current web search
engines, which is to display a variable number of results from a
variable number of collections in a vertically oriented ranked list
in a query dependent manner. The latter display method requires
careful tuning, either on large numbers of users or on log data, both
of which are unavailable for complex or multi-session search tasks.

Study Setting

Through inquiries among staff at the humanities department of
our university we searched for a course suitable for our study, one
in which students complete the cycle of a research project including the development of a research question, searching for and interpreting materials, and reporting about their findings. The course
that offered this structure and on which we finally settled is entitled: “Reception of media in historical perspective.” The lecturer is
experienced in teaching the course and used the same course schedule and assignments as in previous years. The course consists of
two parts, we only focus on the first five weeks in which students
conclude the following research project: “reconstruct the historical
context of the 1950’s (start of television) or 1920’s (start of film) in
order to explain the emancipatory role of a famous female television/film personality. Write a photo essay in which you incorporate
primary and secondary sources that place the photos in context.”
The research project is split into four assignments, one due each
week: (i) “familiarize yourself with the television/film personality
of your choice and compose a list of five additional television/film
personalities that fit your theme;” (ii) “start collecting images centered around your theme and collect material that motivates choosing these images;” (iii) “select ten images and add keyword descriptions to create a coherent story;” (iv) “prepare a presentation
explaining the theme of your project, using the collected material.”
These assignments provide structure for the students as well as a
natural separation of the research project into four parts.
Subjects. In total twenty-five students participated in the course
and all were at the postgraduate level in the area of media studies.
The sample consists of 12 men and 13 women, aged in terms of

125

median (MD) and interquartile range (IQR) around twenty-three
years (MD = 23, IQR = 22–24). We asked subjects background
questions using a 5 point Likert-type scale, where a one indicates
no agreement and a five indicates extreme agreement. Subjects reported high levels of experience in general computer use (MD = 4,
IQR = 4–5) and using online search tools (MD = 4, IQR = 4–
5),
Procedure. At the end of the first lecture the experimenters presented the aggregated search system, explained how the three displays work and described the available data sources. After the presentation subjects were invited to sign up for the experiment, fill in
a consent form and create a login. Subjects who signed up were not
required to use the interface but were encouraged to use the system
as a supplement to the sources normally used in the class. The incentive for using the system was the availability of unique sources
otherwise unavailable. The experiment lasted 4 weeks.
Data collection. In conducting a naturalistic study there is a tension between collecting as much data as possible and affecting the
environment through this data collection process. After negotiating
with the lecturer we settled on three points of interaction with the
subjects: at the end of the first lecture, once during the project and
at the end of the final lecture (of the first part of the course). Participation of the students in all parts of the study was optional and
no requests were made to use any specific features or to complete
specific tasks with the aggregated search system, e.g., bookmarking. It was not deemed appropriate to collect the project grades of
the students for use in the experimental analysis.
Two methods were used to collect qualitative data: open question surveys, and focus group discussions. In preparation of the
focus group, subjects were asked to complete two online questionnaires, one before the second class and one before the fourth class.
Questions focussed on the motivation to use a particular type of
display. At the end of the second lecture and the final lecture a 15
minute focus group discussion was conducted. The discussion focussed on the motivation for using a particular type of display and
switching between displays. The discussion was tape recorded and
transcribed for later analysis. In addition, we collected quantitative data by logging all actions with the aggregated search system.
See [12] for further details about subjects’ browsing behavior.

3.2

Figure 3: Cumulative number of mouse hovers recorded per
day for the tabbed display (solid line), blended display (dashed
line) and similarity display (cross marked).
are recorded for the tabbed display (solid) throughout the 28 days
of the project. The blended display (dashed) receives less hovers,
and the similarity display (crossed) receives the least hovers. In the
second week more hovers are recorded for the tabbed and blended
display compared to the first and last week. This may be due to the
assignment of that week or the focus group after the second lecture.
We return to this issue in the discussion of the qualitative analysis.
Next, we investigate whether individual subjects differ in the
amount of use of each display. In the log data we find that not
all subjects used all of the displays provided by the aggregated
search interface. For all 25 subjects, hovers are recorded for the
tabbed display, for 18 subjects hovers are recorded for the blended
display, and for 11 subjects hovers are recorded for the similarity
display. Figure 4 shows the total number of hovers recorded per
user during the project on the tabbed display (solid bar), blended
display (dashed bar), and similarity display (crossed bar) ordered
by the total number of hovers. We observe that for 23 out of 25
subjects most hovers are recorded for the tabbed display, while for
2 subjects most hovers are recorded for the blended display. The

Analysis

To investigate what type of display subjects use and whether they
switch between display types in a multi-session search task, we first
analyze the log data and then place our findings in the context of
the qualitative data collected.
Log analysis. We first investigate whether there is a change in the
amount that each of the three displays was used during the project.
We considered three alternative indicators for the amount of use
of a display. First, the amount of time that a subject spent logged
into the system may overestimate the time a subject actually spent
using the system. Similarly, clicks may underestimate the use of
the system as inspection of result pages does not necessarily lead
to clicks. We finally settled on the number of mouse hovers within
a particular display as an indication for the amount of use of a display. A mouse hover is recorded when the cursor remains in the
same position for 40ms and is only recorded again if the position
changes [13]. Figure 3 shows the cumulative number of hovers
with each of the three displays per day. We observe a sharp increase in the number of hovers recorded for each display before the
7th, 14th, 21th, and 28th day of the project, followed by a plateau
of inactivity. These days coincide with the lecture and assignment
deadline for each week and provides a natural separation of the
course project into four stages. We further observe that most hovers

Figure 4: Total number of hovers received per user during
the project on the tabbed display (solid bar), blended display
(dashed bar), and similarity display (crossed bar).

126

blended interface is used notably by 8 subjects for which 25% or
more of their total hovers occur with the blended display.
Finally, we investigate whether individual subjects differ in the
amount of use of each display per week. Figure 5 shows the number of hovers recorded for each subject per week of the project
with the tabbed display (solid bar), blended display (dashed bar),
and similarity display (crossed bar). We observe that during the
first week (bottom row in Figure 5) out of the 25 subjects 11 make
no or limited use of the displays. Of the remaining subjects’ most
have at least 75% of their hovers in the first week recorded with the
tabbed display (12/25). For the remaining subjects (2/25) one predominantly uses the blended display, the other the find-similar display. In the second week (second row Figure 5, use of all displays
increases. Out of 25 subjects 10 have around 100% of their hovers recorded for the tabbed display. The blended displays are used
more than in the first week as for 8 subjects about 50% or more of
their hovers are recorded with the blended display and two with the
find-similar display. The remaining 5 subjects have no or hardly
any hovers recorded for any of the displays. In the third week no or
a limited number of hovers are recorded for most subjects (17/25)
with the aggregated search system. The remaining subjects (8/25),
however, continue to use the system with an intensity comparable
to that of week 2. In the fourth week use drops to a level similar to
that of week 1 with (13/25) active subjects. Of these subjects, one
uses the tabbed and blended display equally, the remaining subjects
predominantly use the tabbed display.
We perform a Chi square test to investigate whether these differences in display usage per week are due to chance and find that
there is significant association between project week and use of
display (χ2 (df = 6, N = 311061) = 14458.8, p < 0.001). Table 1 shows a cross-tabulation of display type and project week.
We find that in the second and third week relatively more attention
is spent to the blended display (50% and 30%) than the tabbed display (45% and 20%), which receives attention more throughout the
project. The standardized residuals of the hover values that most
contribute to the significant effect are highlighted in boldface. Especially the amount of use of the similarity display in the first week
is surprising, as well as the increased use of the blended display in
the third and diminished use in the fourth week. Use of the tabbed
display dominates the fourth week.
The absolute number of hovers provides an indication of the
amount of use. Whether subjects switch between displays, how-

Table 1: Cross-tabulation of display type and project week,
in percentages of both the week marginals and the interface
marginals. The number of hovers are distributed as: tabbed
N = 215284, blended N = 85488, and similarity N = 10289.
Standardized residuals are show in brackets, the largest are
highlighted in boldface
tabbed
blended
similarity
week 1

70.4%
19.0% (3.5)

22.1%
15.0% (-24.7)

7.5%
42.4% (55.5)

100%

week 2

67.7%
45.3% (-6.7)

29.5%
49.7% (14.8)

2.7%
100%
38.3% (-11.8)

week 3

60.5%
19.9% (-27.9)

36.9%
30.5% (47.8)

2.6%
100%
17.9% (-10.2)

week 4

89.1%
15.8% (46.7)

10.5%
4.7% (-63.2)

0.4%
100%
1.4% (-31.7)

100%

100%

100%

ever briefly, and in what sequence remains unclear. Figure 6 shows
the same data as Figure 5—the number of hovers recorded for each
subject per week of the project with the tabbed display (solid bar),
blended display (dashed bar), and similarity display (crossed bar)—
on a log scale. We observe that 6 out of 25 subjects only use the
tabbed display and 4 out of 25 subjects only switch once to another
display during the 4 weeks of the study. The remaining 15 subjects
switch 2 or more times between displays and switching occurs in
all 4 weeks. The tabbed display is the default whenever subjects login to the system and switching between displays takes a conscious
effort. It is to be expected that in the first week subjects explore
the system and try the various options. That switching between
displays occurs in any of the weeks and for some subjects several
times within a week indicates that subjects have a function for each
display during the project.

Figure 6: Number of hovers log scaled per user for each of the
four stages with the tabbed display (solid bar), blended display
(dashed bar), and similarity display (crossed bar).
Qualitative analysis. The above analysis shows that a majority
of the subjects switches display during the weeks of the research
project. In the first week subjects predominantly use the tabbed display, while a minority prefers to use another display. In the second
and third week of the project usage of the blended display increases

Figure 5: Number of hovers per user for each of the four stages
of the project with the tabbed display (solid bar), blended display (dashed bar), and similarity display (crossed bar).

127

over that of the first week. The number of subjects using the system, however, decreases. Below we summarize the qualitative data
gathered from two surveys and two focus group discussions and
discuss subjects’ motivation to switch between displays.
Before the second lecture 15 subjects completed a survey with
open questions about the use of the three displays during the first
week. On the question why subjects did or did not use the tabbed
display all subjects indicated to have used the system: 8 subjects
indicated to use the display to explore the collections and to get
an impression of the available material; 5 subjects used the display
to try out the system; 1 subject used the display but provided no
motivation; and 1 subject liked the ability to specify in which collection to search. On the question why subjects did or did not use
the blended display 10 subject indicated not to use the blended display: 5 subjects indicated not to have decided on a specific topic
for their project yet and that they preferred the tabbed display to
explore available material; and 5 subjects did not provide a motivation. Of the remaining 5 subjects that did use the blended display:
3 subjects indicated to like the blended display as it provided them
with a better overview than the tabbed display; 1 subject found the
blended display confusing; and 1 subject was trying out the display. On the question why subjects did or did not use the similarity
display 8 subjects indicated not to use this display: 4 subjects indicated not to have decided on a specific topic; and 4 provided no
motivation. Of the remaining 7 subjects that did use the similarity
display: 3 subjects expected to find related television personalities;
2 subjects found that the similarity display did not provide relevant
information; and 2 subjects were trying out the display.
In a 15 minute focus group discussion with 25 participants conducted at the end of the second lecture we focussed on the motivation for using or not using the system with a particular display.
The consensus among participants is that the information provided
by most of the sources is too specific for the current stage of the
project: “in this phase I want general information, now when I
search for photos of her I would get very specific information.” Due
to the stage of the project the tabbed display, with which a single
collection can be explored, was preferred: “I found the Wiki interesting, because of our assignment this week” and “next week I will
search differently, as this week was for exploration.” In the similarity and blended display all collections are presented at the same
time which subjects found less useful: “you get results with which
you can not get an overview of the topic.” Subjects also noted to
prefer other resources, e.g., Wikipedia, and web search engines in
order to get an overview of the possible topics for their project.
In summary, the above qualitative data suggests several reasons
why subjects preferred the tabbed display during the first week and
why use of the system was lower compared to the second week.
First, the search behavior in this stage was of an exploratory nature
as subjects tried to get an overview of available information and
to decide on a topic for their project. Second, the information in
most sources other than the Wiki was too specific. For example,
a photo of a presenter and a guest during a specific broadcast of
a television show provides little background information necessary
to get oriented on a topic, for this purpose Wikipedia and similar
sources are more useful. Finally, subjects preferred to use other
resources such as Wikipedia and web search engines.
Before the fifth lecture 15 students again completed a survey
with open questions about the use of the three displays during the
second third and fourth week. Regarding the use of the tabbed display 6 subjects remarked that they liked to use it to find specific
information in a specific collection, while 3 subjects preferred it to
get an overview, and 1 provided no motivation. Subjects that did
not use the tabbed interface favored the use of external sources (3

subjects) or preferred the overview of multiple collections (2 subjects). Regarding the blended display 7 subjects remarked that it
was useful to find additional information: “to find next to images,
more specific information about a person or event” or “get an as
complete as possible overview of what is available about a specific
program.” To search for images 2 subjects preferred the blended
display and 1 subject preferred the overview without searching for
anything specific. The remaining 4 subjects did not find the blended
display useful as it was confusing or did not provide relevant material. The similarity display was used by 2 subjects that mentioned
being curious about the material that would be found. The remaining 13 subjects did not use the similarity display because they did
not get around to using it or because results were irrelevant.
We conducted a second 15 minute focus group discussion with
25 students at the end of the fourth week. We focused again on the
motivation for using a particular display and centered the discussion around three points: (i) did becoming more familiar with the
search system affect display choice; (ii) did increased knowledge
of the research topic affect display choice; and (iii) did the assignment each week affect display choice. Subjects did not experience
difficulties in using the displays:“it is a reasonably intuitive system,
I understand it.” They did not associate any changes in display use
with an increase in familiarity with the search system. Both increasing knowledge of the research topic and type of assignment
are factors that subjects associate with changes in display use. Two
groups emerged in this discussion. One group that changed from
using the tabbed display to using the blended display: “I started to
use the combined display more, because I know what I need, and
then I want to see everything that is available about her.” The other
group changed from using the blended display to using the tabbed
display:“I felt the same, that my search started to become more focussed, but then I preferred using the tabbed display because in the
first week you do not know how to use photos and program guides,
and now I wanted to know what was said in those sources about
a specific person.” Some subjects remarked that they did not use
the system in later weeks of the project as it did not contain any
relevant material for the theme they had chosen. There were two
options for a project theme, i.e., female role models in television
or film, see section 2. The material in the repositories is predominaltly focussed on television and does not contain as much relevant
material for the second theme.
In summary, the second survey and focus group suggests that
after the first week subjects’ use of the system increased as their
search topic became more concrete and the various sources became
more relevant. We find several motivations for the switching behavior between displays throughout the project. The use of the tabbed
display is motivated in the first week by an exploratory information
need, where the Wiki was the only suitable source. In later weeks
searching a single source is motivated by a more specific information need, e.g., photos for the essay. The use of the blended display
is initially motivated by a need to explore the content of the various sources. Later the blended display provides a way to explore
multiple sources simultaneously for material about a specific entity. We observed several switching patterns in Figure 6 that can be
explained using the above motivations. Whether subjects engaged
in a particular pattern seemed to depend on the individual subject.
Some subjects indicated to have searched with the blended display
in the first week and preferred to continue searching with the tabbed
display in the second week. In this case the blended display is only
used for an initial exploration of the sources. Other subjects repeatedly switched between the tabbed and blended display during the
project. In these cases the blended display is likely used to search
for additional information about a specific entity across sources.

128

Limitations. The setup of the longitudinal study involved that subjects were asked several times, i.e., focus group and surveys, about
their use of and switching between displays. This may have influenced the behavior of the subjects. To avoid influencing subjects
two measures were taken. First, subjects do not get a reward and
have no obligation to use the tool. Their priority is to finish the
assignment for each week and pass the course. To this end subjects
choose to use the display which they feel will be most effective in
solving their task [19]. As one subject remarked: “I have to search
longer before I find something [with the aggregated search system]
and I notice that I want to be efficient and then I quickly switch to a
web search engine. I want to use the [aggregated search system] because I know you [the experimenters] need that, but at some point I
think [insert expletive] I need to find my material and then I choose
for something that quickly gives me results...” Although use of the
system diminished in the third and fourth week, a number of subjects used the system and switched displays throughout the project.
This suggests that the tabbed and blended displays are both found
useful by some of the subjects and that each display supports a recurring need. Second, subjects were encouraged to use the system
and explore all of its functionality with equal emphasis. The find
similar and blended displays were both mentioned in the first focus
group as being used less than the tabbed display in order to elicit
a discussion about why this is. If the focus group discussion had
any influence on the use of the find-similar display than this had a
diminishing effect on its use.

4.

[event] represents an event related to the corresponding celebrity.
The tasks are modeled after the assignments subjects received in
the longitudinal study, i.e., starting out broad and gradually becoming more specific. Randomizing this order would obfuscate the
simulation of a multi-session search task.
A subject completes 3 sub-tasks that are either dependent or parallel [16]. In a dependent series of sub-tasks all tasks are performed
with respect to the same celebrity, while in a parallel series of subtasks each task has a different celebrity as topic simulating changes
in a users information need. In the parallel condition the celebrities are randomized across tasks and in the dependent condition
celebrities are randomized across subjects. In this manner each
celebrity and task combination is seen an equal amount of times in
each condition. All subjects are presented with the same display for
each task. To complete the first task subjects are provided with the
tabbed display, for the second task with the blended display, and
for the third task with the similarity display.
We used a fixed order for the displays as we are interested in the
preference of the blended display in later stages of the multi-session
search task. In this way subjects are able to become familiar with
the repositories using the tabbed display before encountering the
blended display.
Subjects. A group of 44 undergraduate students participated in
the study. For two of the subjects a technical failure prevented
recording the pre-experiment questionnaire data. All analyses reported in the results section are excluding these two subjects and
are conducted on the remaining 42 subjects. The students (30 female, 12 male) were around nine-teen years of age (MD = 19.0,
IQR = 19–21.75). Random assignment to conditions resulted in
two groups. The dependent task group contained 23 students (6
male and 17 female), where the parallel condition group contained
19 subjects (6 male and 13 female). We asked subjects of both
groups to answer background questions using a 5 point Likert-type
scale, where a one indicates no agreement and a five indicates extreme agreement. Subjects generally reported high levels of experience in general computer use (MD = 4, IQR = 4–5).
We additionally measured topic knowledge (1 item scale) and
search experience (7 item scale) to make sure that these characteristics were balanced over the two groups. We found no significant difference between the two groups in terms of topic knowledge
(Z=.68, p=.50), general computer use (Z=.18, p=.86) or search experience (Z=.20, p=.84) using Wilcoxon rank-sum tests.
Procedure. The study was conducted on two separate occasions in
a computer lab equipped with 30 computers. Subjects could sign
up for one of two time slots to participate in the study. Subjects of
the first slot were asked not to communicate about the experiment
until the second run had been finished. Each occasion of the study
started with an introduction to the research project and a viewing
of a 5-minute tutorial video explaining the use of the search displays. After the viewing of the tutorial, subjects were invited to fill
in a consent form and create a login. Subjects were not allowed
to talk, use mobile phones or open any other browsers. Four experimenters invigilated each of the experiments. After completing
a background questionnaire eliciting demographics subjects were
randomly assigned to either the dependent or parallel condition and
presented with a pre-experiment questionnaire to collect information about search experience and prior knowledge about the task
topic(s). Next, subjects started on the multi-session search task. For
every task the subjects were given 10 minutes after which they were
redirected to a post-task questionnaire asking about the topic difficulty, the perceived usability of the display, and the search effectiveness of the display. After the final search task a post-experiment
questionnaire was presented that asked subjects to order the dis-

A LABORATORY STUDY

In our first, longitudinal study we observed that the majority of
subjects switched between displays and that use of the blended display was motivated by a need to explore the content of the sources
available in the aggregated search system. Initially subjects desired
an overview of the sort of information generally available in the
sources, later the blended display was used to obtain an overview
whenever a new specific information need arose, i.e., what is available in each source about a specific entity. We are interested in
whether user preferences change in later stages of the multi-session
search task depending on whether there are changes in the users’
information need. We recreated this process in a laboratory study
by assigning subjects three tasks to complete: the first task with
a tabbed display, the second with a blended display, and the third
with the similarity display. We compare two conditions: (i) one in
which the three tasks are about the same topic allowing subjects to
become increasingly familiar with the topic; and (ii) one in which
tasks are about different topics simulating changes in information
need. In this setting we investigate whether subjects preferences for
displays deviate as some become more familiar with a topic, while
others encounter new topics.

4.1

Study setting

The study uses a mixed methods design with 3 search tasks as
within subject factor and the (in)dependency of the tasks as between subject factor. This design is similar to other work on multisession search tasks [16] The following 3 sub-tasks emulate a multisession search task: (i) imagine that you work at the editorial office
of a current affairs program and are asked to collect information
about [celebrity]. Collect at least 5 items deemed to be relevant for
this collection, (ii) search for events that were key in the career of
[celebrity]. Collect at least 5 items for this collection, for example
articles and photographs, about these events, (iii) key in the career
of [celebrity] was [event]. Collect at least 5 items about the run-up
to the program, the program itself, and the aftermath. In this experiment [celebrity] stands for one of three television personalities and

129

1

Table 2: Search effectiveness scale.
The display has supported me in solving the search task.

2

The display provided enough information for every collection to solve the search task.

3

The display provided surprising search results relevant to the
search task.

4

The display supported me in finding relevant search results.

Table 3: Interaction effects of the perceived usability, search
effectiveness, topic difficulty, one collection is important and
an overview is important responses in terms of median (interquartile range) across conditions (dependent and parallel)
and across topics. The Kruskal Wallis hypothesis test is used to
test for significant within subject effects, the Mann-WhitneyU
hypothesis test is used to test for significance between subjects.
task 1
task 2
task 3
condition
perceived usability
K-W (H,p)

plays by preference, and to express any remarks they might have
about the experiment. In total an experiment lasted 1.5 hours.

dependent 3.9 (3.8-4.1) 3.6 (3.3-4.1) 3 (2.7-4)
(17.7, <.001)
parallel
3.7 (2.9-4) 3.7 (3.1-4.1) 3.4 (2.9-3.7) (2.90, .24)
M-W (U,p) (108,<.001) (197, .30)
(190, .24)

Data collection. We use two Likert-scales to measure subjects’
preference for a particular type of display. For each item in the
scales subjects indicated their agreement with the statement on a
scale from one to five, where a one indicates no agreement and a
five indicates extreme agreement. To arrive at a single score for
each Likert-scale the mean of the responses was taken. To measure
perceived usability we use an adaptation of the perceived usability
sub-scale of the O’Brien Engagement Scale [21]. We modified the
scale to apply to an aggregated search setting by substituting the
word “shopping” and “website” by “searching” and “display” in the
items. Additionally, we rephrased some of the items to a positive
wording to arrive at an alternating 10 item scale.
To measure search effectiveness we used the items in Table 2. A
final 3 items were devoted to subjects’ perception of the task: (i)
“the task was difficult to complete;” (ii) “there was one collection
most useful in solving the search task;” and (iii) “to get an overview
of the results in different collections is important in solving the
task.” These were not combined and are analyzed separately. All
actions with the aggregated search interface were logged.

4.2

dependent 3 (2-3)
parallel
3 (3-4)
M-W (U,p) (134, .017)

task difficulty
2 (2-3)
3 (2-4)
3 (2-3)
2 (2-3)
(151, .045) (155, .054)

(5.95, .051)
(6.45, .040)

search effectiveness
dependent 3.3 (3.3-3.8) 3.3 (2.8-3.9) 3.3 (2.4-3.9) (2.68, .26)
parallel
3.3 (3.3-3.8) 3.3 (3.0-3.6) 3.3 (2.6-3.6) (3.21, .20)
M-W (U,p) (194, 0.27) (201, 0.33) (194, 0.27)
dependent 4 (3-4)
4 (3-4)
parallel
M-W (U,p) (214, .46)

overview important
3 (3-4)
3 (3-4)
4 (3-4)
3 (3-4)
(149, .040) (183, .19)

one collection important
dependent 4 (3.5-4)
3 (2-3.5)
3 (2-3.5)
4 (3-4)
3 (2-4)
3 (2-4)
parallel
M-W (U,p) (148, .038) (211, .43)
(218, .50)

Results

(4.02, .13)
(2.75, .25)

(16.4, <.001)
(2.70, .26)

condition subjects find that the tasks become easier as they search
material for new topics with the blended displays, while in the dependent condition task difficulty first decreases and then increases.
This seems counter intuitive as subjects in the dependent condition
have encountered more material on the topic and during the first
two search tasks and should have a better idea of what search terms
and which sources to use.
We find no relation between topics and the search effectiveness
that subjects experience with the displays.
Two possible factors that moderate the preference of subjects for
a certain display are: (i) whether for a particular task a subject considers a single collection as the most important source to search
for material; and (ii) whether a subject considers it important to
get an overview of the material available in different collections for
a certain task. We do not find any interaction between the tasks
and the importance of getting an overview. We do find a significant interaction between tasks and the fact that a single collection
is considered to be the most important in solving a task (KruskalWallis H(2, N = 42) =16.4, p<.001). Post hoc comparisons show
a significant difference between task 1-task 2 (Mann-Whitney U(N
=42) =109.5, p=<.001) and between task 1-task 3 (Mann-Whitney
U(N =42) =103.5, p<.001). Subjects in the dependent conditions
initially consider a single collection important to solve the search
task, while in later tasks more collections become important.

We first investigate whether subjects’ preferences differ within
conditions in terms of relations between task and the dependent
variables usability, task difficulty, and search effectiveness. We use
non-parametric tests as data is collected on ordinal scales, and not
all variables meet the assumption of normality. Table 3 shows the
median (M) and inter quartile range (IQR) for each of the dependent variables split over each topic and the two conditions, i.e.,
dependent and parallel. We observe that there is a significant interaction between task and perceived usability of the display in the
within subject dependent condition (Kruskal-Wallis H(2, N = 42)
=17.7, p<.001), top part of Table 3). Post hoc comparisons show
a significant difference between task 1-task 2 (Mann-Whitney U(N
=42) =155, p=.008) and between task 1-task 3 (Mann-Whitney U(N
=42) =81.5, p=<.001) at the Bonferroni corrected significance level
of α = .05/3. These results show that when the topic of the search
task remains the same, subjects find the tabbed display easiest to
use, and that the blended displays provided in later stages are considered more difficult to use. In the parallel condition we do not find
a significant interaction between topics and usability. The median
and IQR values are stable for the first two topics and decreases for
the third topic. With this result we are unable to determine whether
users find the blended display easier to use to explore a new topic.
We further observe that there is a significant interaction between
task and task difficulty in the within subject parallel condition (Kruskal-Wallis H(2, N = 42) =6.45, p=.04), second row of Table 3).
Post hoc comparisons show a significant difference between task 1task 3 (Mann-Whitney U(N=42) =94.5, p=.006). In the dependent
condition we do not find a significant interaction, although in terms
of the median values the first and third task are considered more
difficult than the second task. This suggests that in the parallel

Next, we investigate between subject effects in terms of relations
between topic knowledge and the dependent and moderating variables. We find that in the first task there is a significant difference between the perceived usability reported by subjects from the
dependent and parallel condition (Mann-Whitney U(N=42)=108,
p<.001). We further observe that in the first and second task there

130

With respect to our second research question, we find that when
subjects are completing search tasks about the same topic there is
a negative influence on the usability of a blended display when
switching from a tabbed to a blended display. We also find that
when subjects are completing search tasks about different topics
there is a decrease in perceived task difficulty when switching from
tabbed to blended displays. These findings suggest that subjects are
more likely to switch to a blended display when their information
need changes since switching is then associated with decreasing
task difficulty. While switching to a blended display is less likely
when subjects are engaged in a sequence of search tasks related to
the same topic because of a negative influence on usability.
Turning to our third research question, we find that there are several factors that influence the preferences of subjects for the tabbed
display, i.e., whether subjects find the tabbed display easy to use,
whether they find the first search task easy, and whether they find
that one of the collections is most important in solving the first
search task. These factors limit the generalizability of our findings
as the observed interactions between changes in information need
and usability (information need and task difficulty) may be specific
to our sample with this particular configuration of these factors.
In general, both studies suggest reasons for subjects to change
preferences and switch displays during a multi-session search task.

Table 4: Cross tabulation of search moves in stage 1 for the
dependent and parallel conditions. Search moves are given in
percentages with the standardized residuals in brackets.
move
dep.%(N=926)
par.%(N=728)
paginate
bookmark
filter
change tab
queries
view docs
delete bookmark
unique queries

6.48
11.77
17.93
21.38
11.23
22.14
0.32
8.75

(-1.38)
(-1.37)
(1.21)
(1.14)
(-0.55)
(0.28)
(-0.46)
(-0.08)

9.34
15.52
14.29
17.58
12.64
21.15
0.55
8.93

(1.55)
(1.55)
(-1.36)
(-1.29)
(0.62)
(-0.32)
(0.52)
(0.09)

is a significant difference between the task difficulty reported by
subjects from the dependent and parallel condition (Mann-Whitney
U(N=42)=134, p=.017), i.e., in the dependent condition the first
and second task are considered easier.
Regarding the moderating variables we find that in the second
task subjects in the parallel condition consider getting an overview
more important than subjects in the dependent condition (MannWhitney U(N=42)=149, p=.40). With respect to the importance
of a single collection to solve the first search task, subjects in the
dependent condition consider this more important than subjects in
the parallel condition.
During the first stage subjects are assigned the same task and
possess the same level of prior knowledge. Subjects were randomly
assigned to the dependent and parallel conditions and no significant
differences were found in terms of subjects’ background, i.e., prior
knowledge, search experience, and computer use. Finding significant effects in the first stage indicates the presence of additional
factors that possibly interact with the dependent variables. Table 3
shows that subjects in the dependent condition consider the first
task easier, a single collection more important, and find the tabbed
display easier to use than subjects in the parallel condition.
We also investigate to what extend search strategy is involved
in the effects between the two conditions. Table 4 shows a cross
tabulation of the search moves with the tabbed display recorded
within the dependent and parallel condition. We find that there is
a significant relation between the moves made in a display and the
conditions (χ2 (df =7,N=1654)=16.2, p=.022). From the standardized residuals we find that especially the following search actions
contribute to the significant effect: paginating, bookmarking, using
filters and changing collection (tab). Subjects in the dependent condition tend to switch between collections and use the facet filters,
while subjects in the parallel condition tend to paginate and bookmark more frequently. This suggests that subjects in the dependent
condition initially explore more of the collections while subjects in
the parallel condition dig deeper into material of a single source.

5.

6.

RELATED WORK

The work described in this paper expands on work from two
fields of study: aggregated search and multi-session tasks. Studies
in aggregated search have investigated whether users prefer tabbed
or blended displays for single-session search tasks of varying complexity. Most closely related to our study is work by [28] who find
that for complex tasks users prefer blended displays. A later study
shows that indeed more verticals are clicked when task complexity increases, but that users do not necessarily prefer a blended or
tabbed display [4]. As a possible explanation the search experience
of the subjects is suggested. We find that the users actually change
interface preference during a specific type of multi-session search
task depending on changes in information need.
Regarding studies on multi-session search tasks, there is work
that shows that increasing topic knowledge affects dwell time [16],
which can be used as a predictor for document usefulness. We did
not analyze the effect of increasing topic knowledge at this level of
granularity and foccussed on the effect of changes in information
need rather then the increase of topical knowledge. Other work on
understanding multi-session search task is focussed on describing
the factors involved [9, 14, 31] and the search patterns of users with
existing systems [17, 35]. Our work is different in that it attempts
to compare the usefulness of a new type of system to an existing
system within the context of a multi-session task.

DISCUSSION

7.

Regarding our first research question, we find that the majority of subjects switch between displays during the project. The
main motivation to use the tabbed display is to zoom in on a single source as other sources are not considered relevant at that stage
of the project, e.g., Wiki documents are relevant at the start of the
project to gather general background information, while photos of
specific events become relevant at a later point. The use of the
blended display is initially motivated by a need to explore the content of various sources. Later the blended display provides a way
to explore multiple sources simultaneously for material related to a
specific information need.

CONCLUSION

Aggregated search interfaces are a promising way to provide
users with an overview of results from various sources. In this paper we investigated the use and preferences of users for a tabbed
and blended display within the context of a multi-session search
tasks. In our first, longitudinal study we observed that the tabbed
display is predominantly used motivated by a need to zoom in on
specific sources. The majority of subjects, however, switched between the tabbed and blended displays. Use of the blended display
was motivated by a need to explore the content of the sources available in the aggregated search system. Initially, subjects desired
an overview of the sort of information generally available in the

131

sources, later the blended display was used to obtain an overview
whenever a new specific information need arose.
In a laboratory study a multi-session search task was recreated,
composed of three tasks with either a tabbed or blended display.
The tasks were manipulated by either providing three tasks about
the same topic or about three different topics. We found that a
stable information need across multiple sub-tasks negatively influences perceived usability of the blended displays, while we do not
find an influence when the information need changes.
The combined results from both studies suggest that subjects
change display preference during a specific type of multi-session
search task, i.e., seeking archival materials across multiple heterogeneous sources during a research project.
Acknowledgements. This research was supported by the European
Community’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreements nr 258191 (PROMISE Network of Excellence) and 288024 (LiMoSINe project), the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO) under project nrs 640.004.802,
727.011.005, 612.001.116, HOR-11-10, the Center for Creation,
Content and Technology (CCCT), the BILAND project funded by
the CLARIN-nl program, the Dutch national program COMMIT,
the ESF Research Network Program ELIAS, the Elite Network
Shifts project funded by the Royal Dutch Academy of Sciences
(KNAW), and the Netherlands eScience Center under project number 027.012.105.

8.

[14] C. Kuhlthau. Inside the search process: Information seeking
from the user’s perspective. JASIS, 42(5):361–371, 1991.
[15] Y. Li. Exploring the relationships between work task and
search task in information search. JASIST, 60(2):275–291,
2008.
[16] J. Liu and N. Belkin. Personalizing information retrieval for
multi-session tasks: The roles of task stage and task type. In
SIGIR ’10, pages 26–33. ACM, 2010.
[17] J. Liu, N. Belkin, X. Zhang, and X. Yuan. Examining users’
knowledge change in the task completion process.
Information Processing & Management, 2012.
[18] W. Lu, Q. Wang, and B. Larsen. Simulating aggregated
interfaces. Workshop on Aggregated Search, pages 24–28,
2012.
[19] J. McGrenere, R. M. Baecker, and K. S. Booth. A field
evaluation of an adaptable two-interface design for
feature-rich software. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact.,
14(1), 2007.
[20] M. Melucci and R. Baeza-Yates. Advanced topics in
information retrieval, volume 33. Springer, 2011.
[21] H. O’Brien and E. Toms. The development and evaluation of
a survey to measure user engagement. JASIST, 61(1):50–69,
2009.
[22] S. Raghavan and H. Garcia-Molina. Crawling the hidden
web. Stanford Digital Libraries Technical Report, 2000.
[23] R. Santos, C. Macdonald, and I. Ounis. Aggregated search
result diversification. In Adv. in Inf. Retr., pages 250–261.
Springer, 2011.
[24] J. Seo, W. Croft, K. Kim, and J. Lee. Smoothing click counts
for aggregated vertical search. In Adv. in Inf. Retr., pages
387–398. Springer, 2011.
[25] A. Shiri. Metadata-enhanced visual interfaces to digital
libraries. JIS, 34(6):763–775, 2008.
[26] M. Shokouhi and L. Si. Federated search. Found. & Trends
in Inf. Retr., 2011.
[27] M. D. Smucker and J. Allan. Find-similar: similarity
browsing as a search tool. In SIGIR ’06, pages 461–468.
ACM, 2006.
[28] S. Sushmita, H. Joho, and M. Lalmas. A task-based
evaluation of an aggregated search interface. In SPIRE ’09,
pages 322–333. Springer, 2009.
[29] S. Sushmita, H. Joho, M. Lalmas, and R. Villa. Factors
affecting click-through behavior in aggregated search
interfaces. In CIKM’10, pages 519–528. ACM, 2010.
[30] D. Tunkelang. Faceted search. Synthesis Lectures on
Information Concepts, Retrieval, and Services, 1(1):1–80,
2009.
[31] P. Vakkari, M. Pennanen, and S. Serola. Changes of search
terms and tactics while writing a research proposal: A
longitudinal case study. Information processing &
management, 39(3):445–463, 2003.
[32] R. White and R. Roth. Exploratory search: Beyond the
query-response paradigm. Synthesis Lectures on Information
Concepts, Retrieval, and Services, 1(1):1–98, 2009.
[33] R. W. White, I. Ruthven, and J. M. Jose. The use of implicit
evidence for relevance feedback in web retrieval. In Adv. in
Inf. Retr., pages 93–109. Springer, 2002.
[34] T. Wilson. Models in information behaviour research. J.
Doc., 55(3):249–270, 1999.
[35] I. Xie and S. Joo. Factors affecting the selection of search
tactics: Tasks, knowledge, process, and systems. Information
Processing & Management, 48(2):254–270, 2012.

REFERENCES

[1] J. Arguello and R. Capra. The effect of aggregated search
coherence on search behavior. CIKM’12, 2012.
[2] J. Arguello, F. Diaz, and J. Callan. Learning to aggregate
vertical results into web search results. In CIKM’11, pages
201–210. ACM, 2011.
[3] J. Arguello, F. Diaz, J. Callan, and B. Carterette. A
methodology for evaluating aggregated search results. In
Adv. in Inf. Retr., pages 141–152. Springer, 2011.
[4] J. Arguello, W. Wu, D. Kelly, and A. Edwards. Task
complexity, vertical display and user interaction in
aggregated search. In SIGIR’12, pages 435–444. ACM,
2012.
[5] A. Aula, R. Khan, and Z. Guan. How does search behavior
change as search becomes more difficult? In SIGCHI’10,
pages 35–44, 2010.
[6] N. J. Belkin. Helping people find what they don’t know.
Communications of the ACM, 43(8):58–61, 2000.
[7] M. Bron, B. Huurnink, and M. de Rijke. Linking archives
using document enrichment and term selection. In TPDL
’11, pages 360–371. Springer, 2011.
[8] M. Bron, J. van Gorp, F. Nack, M. de Rijke, and
S. de Leeuw. A subjunctive exploratory search interface to
support media studies researchers. In SIGIR ’12, pages
425–434. ACM, 2012.
[9] K. Byström. Information and information sources in tasks of
varying complexity. JASIST, 53(7):581–591, 2002.
[10] K. Byström and P. Hansen. Conceptual framework for tasks
in information studies. JASIST, 56(10):1050–1061, 2005.
[11] N. Denzin. The research act: A theoretical introduction to
sociological methods. Aldine De Gruyter, 2009.
[12] J. He, M. Bron, and A. de Vries. Characterizing stages of a
multi-session complex search task through direct and indirect
query modifications. In SIGIR ’13. ACM, 2013.
[13] J. Huang, R. White, and S. Dumais. No clicks, no problem:
using cursor movements to understand and improve search.
In CHI 2011, pages 1225–1234. ACM, 2011.

132

