Browse with a Social Web Directory
Hao Huang†,‡

Yunjun Gao†

Lu Chen†

Rui Li§

Kevin Chiew♯

Qinming He†

†
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, China
School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore
§
Computer Science Department, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA
♯
School of Engineering, Tan Tao University, Vietnam
‡

†

{hh14311, gaoyj, chenl, hqm}@zju.edu.cn, § ruili1@uiuc.edu, ♯ kevin.chiew@ttu.edu.vn

ABSTRACT

provided by various individuals often suffer from noisy and
ambiguous annotations as well as various personal categorizations [4]; and (2) lack of page ranking, although web
pages ranked by their popularity often help users find information more efficiently and conveniently.
Aiming at improving users’ browse experiences and facilitating the web directory construction, we propose a novel
browse system known as SWD (Social Web Directory),
which adopts the social information (e.g., web page tags)
from Del.icio.us to automatically categorize web pages with
the help of the well-edited hierarchical catalog structure in
Open Directory Project, and ranks the web pages in each
category by estimating their popularity. Furthermore, SWD
can also identify expert users and the hottest tags in each
category which enrich the category’s description, and thus
can support community based-exploratory browse [5].
Extensive experiments have been conducted on 18,304 web
pages from Open Directory Project together with 604,032
annotations from Del.icio.us, and the results show that compared with a straightforward method, i.e., using the pure
content of each web page for categorization, our SWD system improves 27.9% of accurary on web page categorization
and 72% of efficiency. Moreover, our case study confirms
that the expert users and hottest tags in each category identified by SWD are of high quality and can help users explore
the category information more effectively.

Browse with either web directories or social bookmarks is an
important complementation to search by keywords in web
information retrieval. To improve users’ browse experiences
and facilitate the web directory construction, in this paper,
we propose a novel browse system called Social Web Directory (SWD for short) by integrating web directories and
social bookmarks. In SWD, (1) web pages are automatically categorized to a hierarchical structure to be retrieved
efficiently, and (2) the popular web pages, hottest tags, and
expert users in each category are ranked to help users find
information more conveniently. Extensive experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our SWD system.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.4.3 [Information Systems Applications]: Communications Applications—Information browsers

Keywords
Browse system; web page categorization; social ranking

1.

INTRODUCTION

Besides search by keywords, browse systems provide an
alternative way for web information retrieval [6], especially
when there is a lack of appropriate keywords or comprehension and learning processes are required during the retrieval
tasks. Thus far, we have seen two generations of browse systems, i.e., (1) web directories, such as Yahoo Web Directory
and Open Directory Project (www.dmoz.org), in which web
pages are collected and categorized manually by skillful editors, and (2) social bookmarking and tagging services, such
as Del.icio.us and citeulike.com, which enable users to annotate web pages by themselves. Nonetheless, these browse
systems still have a few minor flaws in two aspects, namely
(1) lack of an automatic categorization on web pages. To
be specific, the maintenance of a web directory requires extensive human efforts, while the social bookmarks and tags

2.

SYSTEM OVERVIEW

The system contains three parts, i.e., a training data depository, and two models constructed with this depository.
The training data depository is automatically obtained by
merging the well-edited web page catalog of Open Directory
Project (ODP for short) and web page tags from Del.icio.us.
Specifically, the web pages of which the URLs are within
both ODP and Del.icio.us are collected into our training
data depository. Then, any web page in the depository has
information including users who collected it, tags used to
annotate it, and the category it belongs to.
With the training data depository, there are two models
constructed in SWD, i.e., (1) the web page categorization
model, which classifies any newly collected web page into
an existing category according to its tags, and (2) the social
ranking model, which provides a ranking list of the popular
web pages, hottest tags, and expert users in each category.
Fig. 1 shows two snapshots of our SWD system, in which
Part A lists the top categories, Part C the sub-categories,
Parts B & D the corresponding web pages, Part E the hottest
tags in current category, and Part F the expert users.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07 ...$15.00.

865

Figure 2: Average Similarity between Categories

Figure 1: Interface of SWD system

3.

high time complexity or just offer a static rank which is not
related to the category.
To avoid the above limitations of existing browse systems,
we provide a social ranking model for our SWD system,
which can rank the popular web pages as well as expert
users and the hottest tags of each category efficiently.

WEB PAGE CATEGORIZATION MODEL

Compared with previous methods which based on web
page contents and URLs [2, 10] , we propose a more efficient
approach to web page categorization by only investigating
the web page tags annotated by users. This is motivated by
our preliminary study on the tags, which reveal that these
tags can usually describe the web page accurately, and meanwhile, web pages under the same category often have similar
tags and vice versa. For example, Fig. 2 illustrates the average tag-based similarity between the web pages in different
categories, which is defined as
P
pi ∈cx ,pj ∈cy cosine(pi , pj )
sim(cx , cy ) =
|cx | × |cy |

4.1

Since each web page pi has a set of associated users and a
set of tags, it can also be represented as (1) a binary vector
puser
of which each element puser
(1 6 r 6 u, u is the total
i
ir
number of users who have collected web pages for SWD)
indicates whether web page pi is collected by the rth user,
and (2) a binary vector ptag
of which each element ptag
i
ik (1 6
k 6 t) denotes whether web page pi has the tag Tk . With
these two binary vectors, we measure web pages’ popularity
based on the following two features.
User Count. If a web page is collected by many users, it
is often of a high quality and should be recommended to the
other users. Hence, we identify these kinds of web pages by
the user count U C(pi ) of each web page pi , where
X
puser
.
U C(pi ) =
ir

where |cx | and |cy | denote the number of web pages in categories cx and cy , pi and pj are web
pages in each category,
P
w ×w
p ×p
cosine(pi , pj ) = |pii|×|pjj | = √P k 2 ki qPkj 2 . Here, wki
k

wki ×

k

wkj

represents the tag Tk ’s weight in a web page pi , and can be
calculated by the tf-idf metric, i.e.,
wki =

f req(Tk , pi )
N
× lg
max16l6t f req(Tl , pi )
nk

16r6u

Topical Similarity. The topical similarity T S(pi |cx ) between a page pi and a given category cx also indicates whether
this web page should have a high rank in the category.

in which f req(Tk , pi ) is the number of times the tag Tk is
used to annotate web page pi by different users, N the total number of web pages, nk the number of the web pages
containing tag Tk , and t the total number of web page tags
collected in SWD. From Fig. 2, we can learn that tags are
discriminative features for categorization since the average
tag-based similarity between web pages of the same category
is much higher than those from different categories.
Based on the above discussion, we can utilize web page
tags to represent each web page pi as a vector below.
pi = (w1i , w2i , . . . , wki , . . . , wti ).

tag
T S(pi |cx ) = consine(ptag
i , cx )

where ctag
is the category vectorPof cx represented by tags,
x
tag
of which each element ctag
xk =
i I(pi ∈ cx ) × pik , here
1 6 k 6 t and I(·) is the indicator function.
Then the popularity P op(pi |cx ) of a page pi in a category
cx can be calculated as
P op(pi |cx ) =

(1)

Then, classification methods such as Naive Bayes, SVM, and
KNN can be adopted to help SWD categorize web pages by
using these vectors.

4.

Popular Web Pages

4.2

T S(pi |cx )
U C(pi )
+
.
maxpj ∈cx T S(pj |cx )
maxpj ∈cx U C(pj )

Expert Users

Listing up expert users can help a new user find useful web
pages via their collected web pages, and meanwhile stimulate
users to collect new web pages of high qualities into our
system. To this end, we present the following three metrics
to help identify the expert users of each category.
Collection Quality. This metric checks whether the web
pages collected by a user ur are useful in a category cx .
X
Quality(ur |cx ) =
P op(pi |cx )

SOCIAL RANKING MODEL

In traditional web directories, web pages of each category
are listed randomly or chronologically, resulting in that web
pages of high quality are often hidden in the mass collections
and thus are inconvenient for retrieval. In social bookmark
fields, although a few ranking algorithms are proposed to
provide the most popular web pages in each category based
on the web page tags [1,9], they often surfer from a relatively

pi ∈cx ,pi ∈ur

where pi ∈ ur denotes that user ur collects web page pi .

866

NB
Mi-F Ma-F
0.565 0.431
0.662 0.505
0.790 0.691
0.792 0.662

Method
Pure Content Based
Description Based
Proposed SWD System
Combined Method

SVM
Mi-F Ma-F
0.626 0.576
0.672 0.636
0.801 0.775
0.811 0.790

where utag
is a binary vector of which each element utag
r
rk
(1 6 k 6 t) indicates whether user ur has used tag Tk .
Contributions of Users. This metric is provided to encourage users to collect new web pages of high qualities for
our system. The contribution Con(ur |cx ) of a user ur to a
category cx is defined as


X
T S(pi |cx )
U C(pi )
+
Con(ur |cx ) =
2d
d
p ∈c ,p ∈u
i

r

Hottest Tags

The hottest tags in each category help describe the category and can also navigate users to their target web pages.
The hotness Hot(Tk |cx ) of the tag Tk (1 6 k 6 t) for
a category cx can be estimated by investigating the tag’s
frequency of occurrences in this category and in all the categories, formally,
P
P
f req(Tk , pi )
f req(Tk , pi )
pi ∈cx
pi ∈cx
P
P
P
P
Hot(Tk |cx ) =
×
f req(Tl , pj )
f req(Tk , pj )
Tl ∈cx pj ∈cx

y pj ∈cy

where Tl ∈ cx means that a tag Tl appears in a category cx .

5.
5.1

NB
0.5

0

0.5
value of α

1

Ma−F
Mi−F

0.4
0.2

2

4
6
Number of Users

8

(b)

where Pcont (cx |pi ) and PSW D (cx |pi ) denote the probability
of a web page pi belonging to a category cx by using the
pure content based method and our proposed method.
Table 1 shows that our propose method achieves a 27.9%
improvement over the pure content based method and 19.1%
over the description based method. In addition, the combined method gets a slight improvement over our method
since it can benefits from both the two methods combined.
To investigate which method provides more profit in this
combination, we vary the parameter α from 0 to 1. When
α = 0, the combined method is equivalent to ours, and when
α = 1, it is equivalent to the description based method.
Fig. 3(a) shows that the combined method often performs
better when the weight of our method is higher, indicating
that our method contributes more in the combination.
Moreover, previous studies have shown that most of classification algorithms including NB and SVM are often sensitive to the document length when using the content of each
web page for categorization [7]. However, since the number
of each web page’s tags is much less than that of the words
within each web page’s content, our proposed approach to
web page categorization is more efficient on both time and
space. Taking the NB algorithm as an example, experimental results demonstrate that it saves 90% in terms of space
and 72% in terms of running time.
Effect of Annotation Amount. The above performance study verifies the effectiveness and efficiency of our
SWD system on web page categorization. In what follows,
we address another concern, i.e., whether the categorization
are stable and at least how many annotations should be collected by SWD to guarantee its categorization performance.
To this end, we examine how the Ma-F and Mi-F of our
categorization results are affected by the increasing number
of tags when more and more users are involved, and depict
the result in Fig. 3(b), in which the x-axis indicates that the
first r users’ annotations are used for web page categorization. The figure shows that (1) the categorization accuracy
improves much on the arrival of each new user when the
number of users involved is small, and (2) improves not very

where d denotes that ur is the dth user who collected pi .

4.3

SVM

0.6

0.6

Figure 3: (a) Mi-F of combined method vs. α. (b)
SWD categorization performance vs. user number

tag
Interest(ur |cx ) = cosine(utag
r , cx )

x

0.7

0.8

(a)

Interests of Users. The metric examines whether a user
ur is a specialist to a category cx by estimating the relevance
between his collection and the category.

i

0.8

SWD Performance

Mi−F of Combined Method

Table 1: Categorization performance comparison

EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
Experiments on Web Page Categorization

Experimental Setup. We collect 18,304 web pages over
60 categories and sub-categories from ODP together their
7,691 tags which are used as annotations for 604,032 times.
We represent each web page as a vector by Eq. (1) (see
Section 3), and respectively utilize Naive Bayes Classifier
(NB for short) and SVM as the classification methods.
To evaluate the average categorization performance of our
SWD system across all categories, we adopt the micro- and
macro-average F-scores (Mi-F and Ma-F for short) as the
performance metrics, and perform 5-fold cross-validation to
reduce the uncertainty of training data and test data.
Performance Study. Besides our SWD system, we also
report the web page categorization performance of the following three methods, i.e., (1) the pure content based method,
which straightforwardly uses the text content of each web
page for the categorization, (2) a state-of-the-art description based method [8], and (3) a combined method, which
combines the categorization results of our proposed method
and the pure content based method as follows.


T arget(pi ) = arg max α·Pcont (cx |pi )+(1−α)·PSW D (cx |pi )

Table 2: The hottest tags in 4 categories
System
tabletpc
tablet
amiga
sinclair
arm

cx

867

Security
firewall
network
vpn
Linux
sysadmin

Programming
java
python
develop
lisp
opensource

Internet
webdesign
blog
css
flash
design

Table 3: Popular web pages in 3 categories and collected by expert users
Category: Java
http://www.eclipse.org
http://java.sun.com
http://pmd.sourceforge.net
http://www.lowagie.com/iText
http://www.onjava.com
Expert User of “Java”: t****v
http://java.sun.com
http://ant.apache.org
http://www.eclipse.org
http://pmd.sourceforge.net
http://argouml.tigris.org

Category: Artificial Intelligence
http://www.agentlink.org/
http://www.aiwisdom.com/
http://bnj.sourceforge.net/
http://www.abelard.org/turpap/turpap.htm
http://www.imagination-engines.com/
Expert User of “Java”: a***o
http://java.sun.com
http://www.eclipse.org
http://pmd.sourceforge.net
http://jakarta.apache.org/cactus
http://argouml.tigris.org

much and tends to be stable as the number of users increases.
Similar as the conclusion in [3], this observation can be explained by the fact that the distribution of tags of a specific
web page tends to be stable during the running of the social
bookmarking systems, e.g., Del.icio.us.

5.2

a ranking list of popular web page in each category. With
this ranking list, users can easily find the most useful web
pages in a certain category with much less clicks and content
reviews. (3) The system also supports community-based exploratory browsing since it offers the hottest tags and expert
users in each category, which enrich the category description
and make the browse of community information easier.

Case Study on Social Ranking Model

In this experiment, we conduct some case studies to confirm the effectiveness of our social ranking model. Towards
this, we collect a sample of Del.icio.us data consisting of
2,879,614 tags made by 10,109 different users on 690,482
different web pages which are automatically categorized to
the hierarchical catalog of ODP by our SWD system.
In SWD, when users are browsing information of a particular category, we will show them the URLs of the most
popular web pages, the hottest tags, and the expert users,
all of which help enrich the description of this category and
can navigate users to find the target information more efficiently and conveniently. For example, Table 2 has listed
the top 5 hottest tags of 4 sub-categories in the “Computer”
category, while Table 3 has listed the URLs of the most popular web pages in of another 3 sub-categories, and the top
URLs collected by 3 expert users of the “Java” sub-category.
From Tables 2 and 3, we can observe that (1) the hottest
tags seem reasonable, these tags (e.g., “tabletpc” for “System” and “css” for “internet” ) summarize the hottest topics
in each domain; (2) the URLs really correspond to authority
web pages in each domain; and (3) the expert users always
bookmark web pages of high qualities in each domain, which
are very helpful for those rookie users who are interested in
this domain. The case study has been also conducted on the
other categories and sub-categories, the conclusion is similar
to the above observation.

6.

Category: Opensource
http://sourceforge.net
http://www.mozilla.org
http://www.mozillazine.org
http://www.gnu.org
http://www.opensource.org
Expert User of “Java”: s*****3
http://java.sun.com
http://ant.apache.org
http://www.eclipse.org
http://jakarta.apache.org
http://java.sun.com/products/jsp

7.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was partly supported by the National Key Technologies R&D Program (Grant No.: 2011BAD21B02), NSFC
61003049, the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central
Universities (Grant No.: 2012QNA5018, 2013QNA5020), and
the Key Project of ZJU Excellent Young Teacher Fund.

8.

REFERENCES

[1] S. Bao, G. Xue, X. Wu, Y. Yu, B. Fei, and Z. Su.
Optimizing web search using social annotations. In
WWW, pages 501–510, 2007.
[2] L. Blanco, N. Dalvi, and A. Machanavajjhala. Highly
efficient algorithms for structural clustering of large
websites. In WWW, pages 437–446, 2011.
[3] H. Halpin, V. Robu, and H. Shepherd. The complex
dynamics of collaborative tagging. In WWW, pages
211–220, 2007.
[4] R. Li, S. Bao, Y. Yu, B. Fei, and Z. Su. Towards
effective browsing of large scale social annotations. In
WWW, pages 943–952, 2007.
[5] G. Marchionini. Exploratory search: From finding to
understanding. Communications of the ACM,
49(4):41–46, 2006.
[6] C. Olston and E. H. Chi. Scenttrails: Integrating
browsing and searching on the web. ACM Transactions
on Computer-Human Interaction, 10(3):177–197, 2003.
[7] X. Qi and B. D. Davison. Web page classification:
Features and algorithms. ACM Computing Surveys,
41(2):12, 2009.
[8] D. Shen, Z. Chen, Q. Yang, H.-J. Zeng, B. Zhang,
Y. Lu, and W.-Y. Ma. Web-page classification through
summarization. In SIGIR, pages 242–249, 2004.
[9] Y. Song, L. Zhang, and C. L. Giles. Automatic tag
recommendation algorithms for social recommender
systems. ACM Transactions on the Web, 5(1):4, 2011.
[10] G.-R. Xue, Y. Yu, D. Shen, Q. Yang, H.-J. Zeng, and
Z. Chen. Reinforcing web-object categorization
through interrelationships. Data Mining and
Knowledge Discovery, 12(2-3):229–248, 2006.

CONCLUSION

We proposed a framework of novel browsing system called
Social Web Directory (SWD), which can automatically categorize web pages collected and tagged by every user and
enable them to browse these web pages in an efficient way.
By taking advantages of the well-edited hierarchial catalog
structure in ODP and the social bookmarks in Del.icio.us,
our SWD system can make up the flaws of previous browsing systems, and has the following three characteristics. (1)
The system constructs a web directory automatically with
the help of social bookmarks. In other words, the maintenance of a web directory does not require skilled editors
to pay extensive efforts any more because our SWD system
enables every user to contribute to the web directory and
locate the desired resources easily. (2) The system provides

868

