Characterizing Stages of a Multi-session Complex Search
Task through Direct and Indirect Query Modifications
Jiyin He

Marc Bron

Arjen de Vries

Centrum Wiskunde en
Informatica
Science Park 123, 1098XG
Amsterdam, the Netherlands

University of Amsterdam
Science Park 107, 1098XG
Amsterdam, the Netherlands

Centrum Wiskunde en
Informatica
Science Park 123, 1098XG
Amsterdam, the Netherlands

j.he@cwi.nl

m.m.bron@uva.nl

ABSTRACT
Search systems use context to effectively satisfy a user’s information need as expressed by a query. Tasks are important factors
in determining user context during search and many studies have
been conducted that identify tasks and task stages through users’
interaction behavior with search systems. The type of interaction
available to users, however, depends on the type of search interface
features available. Queries are the most pervasive input from users
to express their information need regardless of the input method,
e.g., typing keywords or clicking facets. Instead of characterizing interaction behavior in terms of interface specific components,
we propose to characterize users’ search behavior in terms of two
types of query modification: (i) direct modification, which refers
to reformulations of queries; and (ii) indirect modification, which
refers to user operations on additional input components provided
by various search interfaces. We investigate the utility of characterizing task stages through direct and indirect query reformulations
in a case study and find that it is possible to effectively differentiate
subsequent stages of the search task. We found that describing user
interaction behavior in such a generic form allowed us to relate user
actions to search task stages independent from the specific search
interface deployed. The next step will then be to validate this idea
in a setting with a wider palette of search tasks and tools.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: H.3.3 Information Search
and Retrieval; H.5.2 User Interfaces (Evaluation/methodology)

Keywords
Query modification, multi-session task

1.

INTRODUCTION

In order to effectively satisfy users’ information needs as expressed by a query, search systems use context [9]. Many forms of
context exist, including previous queries issued and users’ interacPermission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07 ...$15.00.

897

arjen.de.vries@cwi.nl

tions with search systems. To correctly interpret contextual signals
it is important to determine the underlying factors causing these signals. One salient factor that determines the context of a user is the
task type and task stage in which the user is engaged [3]. Tasks can
range from simple factual search to complex multi-session search
tasks and can consist of single or multiple stages [8]. The interaction of the user with the search system may change depending on
task type and task stage. For example, Vakkari et al. [12] found that
students’ term addition and removal behavior changes during various stages of a research project. For difficult tasks, studies found
that users tend to formulate more diverse queries and use more advanced query operators [2, 6]. In exploratory search tasks, users
prefer more advanced interface features such as facets and comparisons [7, 13]. Work on aggregated search interfaces found that users
have a tendency to click on results from more and more diverse
facets in complex tasks [1, 11]. Independently each of these studies contributes to our understanding of user interaction with various
types of systems across different tasks and stages. The interaction
patterns discovered, however, depend on the type of system used in
the study, e.g., a web search engine provides less interface features
for interaction than an exploratory search system.
Queries are the most pervasive input from users to express their
information need regardless of the input method, e.g., submitting a
query by typing keywords in a search box or modifying a query by
clicking a facet. Therefore, users’ queries and the associated query
formulation behavior provide a consistent feature to determine task
type and stage. We propose to characterize users’ search behavior
in terms of two types of query modification: (i) direct modification,
which refers to reformulations of queries, such as adding, removing or substituting terms in consecutive queries; and (ii) indirect
modification, which refers to user operations on additional input
components provided by various search interfaces such as using
filters, and switching between collections.
We report on a case study that investigates how users’ search behavior changes throughout different stages of their search task. We
focus on two types of search behavior, “exploration” and “focused
search”, and how these behaviors are reflected in users’ interaction
with a system in terms of direct as well as indirect query modifications. We follow 25 students during a four week project. We
provide students with an interface that provides various interface
options, e.g., facets, verticals, and aggregated display. The research
project represents a complex search task spanning multiple sessions
and stages. We confirm empirically that subjects exhibit different
query modification patterns during the various stages of the task.
Our contribution is a demonstration of the effectiveness of using
direct and indirect query modifications as a way of characterizing
different stages of a complex multi-session search task. The ben-

1

2

5

BBC News - Al Gore: political paralysis over climate
15 Sep 2011 - Al Gore, the former vice president of America and
environmental campaigner, tells the BBC about his latest...

stage

#switch_screen

#switch_collection

#filter

1
2
3

46
30
28

71
94
81

44
37
52

Table 1: Cross-tabulation of the number of times an interface
feature is used for each stage of the research project.

BBC - One Planet: An Interview with Al Gore
19 Sep 2011 - The Nobel laureate talks false science, oil addiction

and why victory is inevitable.

aggregated search display. In this display all collections are shown
simultaneously. Results for each collection are horizontally orientated and the vertical order of the six collections is fixed. The
“Similarity Search” has the same layout as the aggregated display
and provides a find-similar feature [10]. By clicking on a document the user submits the current query and the first 100 words of
the clicked document as an OR query.

Gore: short-term mindset deep threat to sustainable...
2 Nov 2011 - Former U.S. Vice President Al Gore said
environment

Wednesday one of the biggest obstacles to investments in...

human interest
documentary

The rise and fall of Al Gore

news

17 Sep 2011 - His ideas got the whole world worried about planet's

sport

climate. Then, the Norwegian parliament bestowed Al Gore...
3

4

Subjects. In total 25 postgraduate students Media Studies participated. The sample consists of 12 men and 13 women, aged
in terms of median (MD) and interquartile range (IQR) around 23
years (MD=23, IQR=22-24). We asked subjects background questions using a 5 point Likert-type scale, where a one indicates no
agreement and a five indicates extreme agreement. Subjects reported high levels of experience in general computer use (MD=4,
IQR=4-5) and using online search tools (MD=4, IQR=4-5).

Figure 1: A screen shot of the aggregated search interface.
Numbers are used to indicate specific components in the text.
efit of transforming interface specific interactions to more general
interaction types, i.e., “exploration” vs. “focused search,” is that interactions observed with different interfaces become comparable.

2.

Log data. We record all queries submitted to the system and any
components clicked by the subjects: switch screen; change collection; check/uncheck filter; paginate; view document; and bookmark
document. The switch screen and change collection actions resubmit a query to the system if the user has already provided one during the session, while the filter actions modify a query by adding
or removing a term. Due to the limited number of “find similar”
operations (4 times in total), they are left out of the analysis.

EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

Search task. The study was conducted as part of a course on “audience reception studies” offered at the Media Studies department
of our university. During a four week project, students investigated
the historical context of the emancipatory role of female television
or film personalities. The students concluded the project by writing a photo essay incorporating primary and secondary sources to
place the photos in context. The design of the project assignment
can be divided into 3 stages: (i) in the first week students were
asked to familiarize themselves with the topic and to pick a number
of television or film personalities; (ii) in the second week students
collected material, i.e., images and documents that motivated their
choice for these images; and (iii) in the third and fourth week students organized the material and prepared a final presentation.

3.
3.1

LOG ANALYSIS
Interface specific interactions

We first determine whether we are able to detect a difference in
the interaction behavior of the subjects in different stages of the research project in terms of the features specific to our search system.
Table 1 shows a cross-tabulation of the number of times an interface feature is used during each stage of the research project. We
find a significant interaction between project stage and the number
of times interface features are used: χ2 (df=6, N=483) = 11.4, p <
.05). In the first stage the differences between using different interface features are smaller than in later stages in which switching
collection is more popular.
Note, that the interactions in Table 1 are highly specific to our
interface making comparison to observations of interactions with
other search interfaces difficult. Next, we will look at more general
forms of characterizing interaction behavior with our system that
are not as dependent on a specific search interface.

Collections.
Six collections, relevant to the assignment about
television and film personalities, from various archives were indexed: (1) a television program collection containing 0.5M metadata records; (2) a photo collection with 20K photos of people
working at television studio; (3) a wiki dedicated to actors and presenters (20K pages); (4) 25K television guides that are scanned
and OCRed; (5) scanned and OCRed newspapers between 1900
and 1995 (6M articles); and (6) digital newspapers between 1995
and 2010 (1M articles). These collection are indexed using Lucene
SOLR 4.0 and we use BM25 as the retrieval model.
Search system. We provided subjects with a search system that
enables various means of interaction in order to support diverse
search behaviors in the various stages of the project. The basic
funtionality of the search system is modeled after a standard web
search interface, see Figure 1, providing a search box (1) and presenting result snippets in a ranked list (4). Access to the various
collections is provided by a navigation menu (2). Additionally, the
system supports facets with query preview capabilities (3) that provide users with term suggestions and the ability to quickly filter and
zoom in on a specific topic [14]. We also provide two additional
interaction capabilities accessible via tabs (5). “Combined Search”
supporting exploration of the various collections by providing an

3.2

Direct query modification

Reformulation types. We consider query reformulations between
two consecutive queries as direct query modifications. In the literature query reformulation has been defined differently, e.g., term addition, removal, and substitution [5]. We simplify the reformulation
types into two types: new or related. Although reducing the number of reformulation types may give the query reformulation patterns less discriminative power, each of the remaining types has an
m
intuitive interpretation. Let query q1 = {ti }n
i=1 and q2 = {tj }j=1

898

Stage Queries
1
“mies bouwman”, “liesbeth list”, “sylvia kristel”, “monique van de ven”.
Note: Each of the query is a Dutch celebrity’s name.
2
“sonja barend”, “sonja barend op maandag”, “sonja barend award”, “sonja op
maandag”, “sonja barend nts”.
Note: Sonja Barend is a Dutch television personality.
3
“wie van de drie", “sonja’s goed nieuws show”, “goed nieuws show”, “sonja
goed nieuws show", “wie van de drie”, “sonja goed nieuws show”.
Note: “Wie van de drie” and “Goed nieuws show” are two TV programs that
Sonja Barend has been involved in.

Table 2: An example of the sequence of queries issued by a user
in different stages.
different topics associated with Sonja Barend, a famous Dutch television personality. In stage 3, his/her queries are focused on two
specific TV programs that Sonja Barend has been involved in.

Figure 2: A comparison of the percentage of direct query modification types in 3 stages: “new query” versus “related query”.

3.3

be two consecutive queries. q2 is a “new” query with respect to
q1 if q1 ∩ q2 = ∅, and a “related” query otherwise. That is, two
queries are related if the terms in two queries overlap. We assume
that users issue “new” queries for different topics, and “related”
queries for related topics. From our log data, we obtain 42, 128,
and 82 consecutive query pairs in stage 1, 2, and 3, respectively.

Indirect query modification

Indirect query modification types.
Some interfaces provide
users with additional input components to a query input box. In
such systems direct query modification patterns may not be as salient
a feature to differentiate task stages By using these input components, users indirectly revise the queries they have issued. We
therefore examine how users use these indirect modifications of the
same query in different search stages.
We consider the following operations as indirect query modification: switch screen, change collection, and check/uncheck filters.
Switching screen allows users to review top results from different
collections. Changing collection allows user to query a different
collection, and applying filters allows users to explore results in
specific aspects of the query. These operations correspond to different ways to explore different aspects of the query.
Intuitively, as shown in the direct query reformulations, users
may explore more in the initial stage, and narrow down their search
with less exploration in later stages. However, while it could be that
users are indeed exploring the content of the collections, an alternative explanation would be that they are simply exploring the functionality of the system. To this end, we investigate an additional
set of operations, referred to as result examination operations, including pagination, view document, bookmark document. Different
from the above exploration operations, with these operations users
examine the retrieved documents with respect to a (unmodified)
specific query. If users were trying out the system features, intuitively, they would not dig into the details of the retrieved content.
To clarify, the indirect query modifications only include exploration actions, excluding the result examination operations. We investigate the former to see whether users’ exploration behavior differs across stages, and the later as signals to indicate whether users
explore the content or the functionality of the system.
Results. Unlike direct query modification that occurs between two
queries, indirect modification occurs within a same query. Table 3
shows the average number of exploration actions per-query in the
three stages. We see that there is a significant difference between
the number of exploration actions issued in stage 1 and that of stage
2 and 3. This confirms our expectation that users explore more
different aspects/collections with respect to a same query in the
initial stage, and less in later stages.
Table 4 shows that, in terms of the per-query number of result examination operations, no significant difference was found between
different stages. We find no evidence that users examine less documents/result lists in the first stage compared to the later stages.
This suggests that the difference between exploration behaviors in
different stages can not be explained by “initial exploration of the

Results. Figure 2 shows the composition of direct query modifications in each of the three stages. That is, the percentage of “new”
and “related” queries among all direct query modifications. We
see that the compositions show clear differences between the three
stages. In stage 1, “new” queries are the majority. The percentage of “new” queries decreases as the users move towards further
stages of their search task. In stage 3, the percentage of “new” and
“related” queries is relatively balanced. This implies that, while
reformulating queries, users tend to issue more queries on different topics in the initial stage, and in later stages more queries on
related topics. A χ2 test confirms that there is a significant interaction between project stage and the number of new and related
queries issued: χ2 (df = 2, N = 252) = 21.14, p < 0.01.
Figure 3 shows patterns of query reformulation actions. In these
graphs, nodes include three states: s (starting query), new (new
query), and rel (related query); and edges are weighted by a transition probability from one node to another, calculated as count(ni →
nj )/count(ni ). For instance, after issuing a “new” query, the probability of issuing a “related” query in stage 1 is 0.08, and the probability of issuing a “new” query is 0.92. While our data is too sparse
to examine the difference between these patterns, we do observe
that transition probabilities change across stages.
In summary, patterns of users’ query reformulations seem to reflect the underlying stages of the search task. In particular, in initial
stages users issue queries associated with more diverse topics than
in later stages. That is, initial queries are more likely exploratory,
while later queries are more focused. The stages of the assignment,
and the necessity to first explore a topic before focussing on a specific aspect both contribute to these variations in search behavior.
Note, however that it is possible to discriminate between these behaviors based solely on the queries submitted to the system.
It is of course possible that queries with completely different sets
of terms refer to similar topics. Analyzing the semantics in this
case of the queries would be useful [4], which we plan for future
investigation. Here, without a systematic mapping between queries
and their underlying topics, we show in Table 2 an example of a
user’s queries in different stages, which to some extent illustrates
the type of topics being searched. In this example, in stage 1, the
user searched for a number of female dutch television personalties,
using their names as queries. In stage 2, his/her search concerns

899

0.92

0.86

0.48

0.33

new

0.80

0.67

s

0.50

0.08

0.20

0.54

rel

0.58

0.14
0.50

s

(a) stage 1

new
0.46

0.54

rel

s

(b) stage 2

new

0.52
0.42

0.46

rel

(c) stage 3

Figure 3: The subfigures (a), (b), and (c) shows the transition probabilities for stage 1, stage 2, and stage 3 of the project respectively.
Stages

Avg.#E

Comparisons

p-values

1
2
3

1.81
0.85
0.90

1 vs. 2
2 vs. 3
1 vs. 3

0.04
0.82
0.03

and tasks, to verify the utility of direct and indirect query modifications to analyze user behavior in information seeking tasks.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by EU Commission FP7 grant nr 257024
the Fish4Knowledge project, and by NWO project nr 640.004.802.

Table 3: Comparing the number of “exploring” actions (#E) in
the 3 stages, significance tested using Wilcoxon ranksums test.

5.
Stages

Avg.#A

Comparisons

p-values

1
2
3

2.63
2.13
2.58

1 vs. 2
2 vs. 3
1 vs. 3

0.15
0.21
0.67

[1] J. Arguello, W.-C. Wu, D. Kelly, and A. Edwards. Task
complexity, vertical display and user interaction in
aggregated search. In SIGIR’12, pages 435–444, 2012.
[2] A. Aula, R. M. Khan, and Z. Guan. How does search
behavior change as search becomes more difficult? In
SIGCHI’10, pages 35–44, 2010.
[3] N. J. Belkin, R. N. Oddy, and H. M. Brooks. Ask for
information retrieval: Part i. background and theory. J. doc.,
38(2):61–71, 1982.
[4] V. Hollink, T. Tsikrika, and A. P. de Vries. Semantic search
log analysis: a method and a study on professional image
search. JASIST, 62(4):691–713, 2011.
[5] B. J. Jansen, D. L. Booth, and A. Spink. Patterns of query
reformulation during web searching. JASIST, 60(7):
1358–1371, 2009.
[6] D. Kelly, K. Gyllstrom, and E. W. Bailey. A comparison of
query and term suggestion features for interactive searching.
In SIGIR’09, pages 371–378, 2009.
[7] B. Kules, R. Capra, M. Banta, and T. Sierra. What do
exploratory searchers look at in a faceted search interface?
In JCDL’09, pages 313–322, 2009.
[8] Y. Li and N. J. Belkin. A faceted approach to conceptualizing
tasks in information seeking. IPM, 44(6):1822–1837, 2008.
[9] M. Melucci. Contextual search: A computational
framework. FnTIR, 6(4-5):257–405, 2012.
[10] M. Smucker and J. Allan. Find-similar: similarity browsing
as a search tool. In SIGIR’06, pages 461–468, 2006.
[11] S. Sushmita, H. Joho, M. Lalmas, and R. Villa. Factors
affecting click-through behavior in aggregated search
interfaces. In CIKM’10, pages 519–528, 2010.
[12] P. Vakkari, M. Pennanen, and S. Serola. Changes of search
terms and tactics while writing a research proposal: A
longitudinal case study. IPM, 39(3):445–463, 2003.
[13] R. Villa, I. Cantador, H. Joho, and J. M. Jose. An aspectual
interface for supporting complex search tasks. In SIGIR’09,
pages 379–386, 2009.
[14] R. W. White and R. A. Roth. Exploratory search: Beyond the
query-response paradigm. Synthesis Lectures on Information
Concepts, Retrieval, and Services, 1(1):1–98, 2009.

Table 4: Comparing the number of “examination operations”
actions (#A) throughout the 3 stages.

system features”, given that users show similar behavior in examine
details of retrieved content.

4.

REFERENCES

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

We have investigated user search behavior in a complex multisession search task, with a search system that provides various
types of input components. We confirm results from previous studies that user search behavior changes during the various stages of an
information seeking task and that variations in the use of specific
input components are salient features in detecting these changes.
We further show that users’ query modification behavior, both in
terms of direct query reformulations as well as in terms of indirect modifications derived from operations on advanced interface
components reflects the underlying task stages users go through.
With direct query modification, users explore more diverse topics
in the initial stage of their task compared to later stages, which are
more focused on related topics. With indirect query modification,
users explore more aspects of a single query in the early stage compared to later stages. Being able to transform interface specific interactions to more general interaction types, while maintaining the
ability to discriminate between stages, suggests that user interaction behavior can be described in a form comparable across search
interfaces with varying input components.
Our study design did not allow for complete control of all conditions. Users were not restricted to our system to accomplish their
assignment, reducing the potential number of queries issued and
limiting our analysis to just that subset. Also, the size of the search
logs we acquired is too small to allow reliable study of higher order
query modification sequences. Our planned follow-up research is
to acquire search log data from a wider variety of search interfaces

900

