Welcome from the General Chairs
Céad míle fáilte - Welcome - to Dublin, Ireland for the 36th Annual ACM SIGIR conference on
research and development in information retrieval.
SIGIR has long been the premier international forum for the presentation of new research results
and the demonstration of new systems and techniques in the field of information retrieval. Since it
was last hosted in Dublin in 1994, the SIGIR conference has grown enormously in participation
and technical diversity, and search and information retrieval has become a ubiquitous part of the
lives of many millions of people across the world. Returning to Dublin after almost 20 years gives
the information retrieval research community the chance to reflect on how the field has developed,
and to celebrate the continuing innovation of leading researchers in information retrieval.
We would like to take this opportunity to recognize that a conference of the scale of SIGIR would
not be possible without the dedicated work of a great many people. Principal among these are the
Program Committee Chairs, Maarten de Rijke, Diane Kelly and Tetsuya Sakai who worked with
50 area chairs and many reviewers to select the papers for the Full Paper program. A special
thanks to Cathal Gurrin and Udo Kruschwitz who took on the new and demanding role of Short
Paper and Demonstration Chairs, and their reviewers who assisted them in selecting the excellent
short paper and demonstration programs from record numbers of submissions. We thank also
Noriko Kando and Séamus Lawless, Tutorial Chairs; Arjen de Vries and Vincent Wade,
Workshop Chairs, Alan Smeaton, Best Paper Awards Chair; Jaime Arguello, Mounia Lalmas and
Grace Hui Yang, Doctoral Consortium Chairs; Susan Feldman and Jimi Shanahan, Industry Track
Chairs; and Liadh Kelly and Lorraine Goeuriot, Proceedings Chairs. We are indebted to Séamus
Lawless, Local Organisation Chair and his team in Dublin. Special thanks also to Laura Grehan,
Publicity Chair and Fiona Maguire, Treasurer, for their involvement throughout the planning and
preparation for the conference.
While SIGIR 2013 is sponsored by ACM, we acknowledge the generous financial support of a
large number of companies and organizations that has enabled us to provide for a great conference
experience. Baidu, Google, Microsoft and Science Foundation Ireland (SFI) generously supported
the conference at the Gold level, Yahoo! at the Silver level and AOL, IBM and Yandex provided
support at the Bronze level. Facebook, itself a newcomer SIGIR supporter, underwrote the
Newcomers Breakfast on the first day of the conference. In addition, Morgan & Claypool,
Springer, Now Publishers and the Qatar Computing Research Institute have all made arrangements
to support and exhibit at the conference. Local financial support was also provided by CNGL,
Dublin City University, and Fáilte Ireland. Finally, we are extremely grateful to Sarah Collins and
her colleagues at Conference Partners Ltd. in Dublin for their support and management of the
conference website, registration, venues, catering, and all local logistics.
We hope that you enjoy the conference and take the opportunity to catch up with old friends and
make new ones in our beautiful and historic surroundings here in Dublin and Ireland.

Gareth J. F. Jones

Páraic Sheridan

Dublin City University

Dublin City University

iii

