Effective Query Expansion with the Resistance Distance
Based Term Similarity Metric
Shuguang Wang

Milos Hauskrecht

Intelligent Systems Program
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260

Department of Computer Science
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260

swang@cs.pitt.edu

milos@cs.pitt.edu

ABSTRACT

2.

In this paper, we define a new query expansion method that
relies on term similarity metric derived from the electric
resistance network. This proposed metric lets us measure
the mutual relevancy in between terms and between their
groups. This paper shows how to define this metric automatically from the document collection, and then apply it in
query expansion for document retrieval tasks. The experiments show this method can be used to find good expansion
terms of search queries and improve document retrieval performance on two TREC genomic track datasets.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search and Retrieval
General Terms: Algorithm, Performance
Keywords: Information Retrieval, Query Expansion, Term
Similarity

Our objective is to define a metric in the term space that
would reflect how likely the terms are to be associated (or cooccur) in the document. We define the metric with the help
of a weighted graph representing direct associations among
terms and their strength. More formally, our model consists
of an undirected weighed graph G = (V, E, w) where nodes
V represent terms in the document, edges E represent pairwise association relations in between them, and weights w
on the edges measure the strength of associations in between
the connected pairs of nodes. In general, the association in
between any two terms is calculated by considering all association paths and cumulative weights connecting them. This
defines a metric on the term space.

1.

METHODOLOGY

Building an Association Graph
We propose to build the graph from the (training) corpus
of documents by parsing each document and by extracting
the pairwise associations among terms on the sentence level.
If these two concepts co-occur in the same sentence, a direct
link in between the concepts is included in the graph. Let
j and k represent two distinct terms. If the two terms cooccur in n > 0 different documents, a link in between j and
k with weight n is added to the graph (See Figure 1).

INTRODUCTION

A fundamental challenge of information retrieval (IR) is to
find documents that are relevant to user queries. The search
queries usually consists of only few terms, which barely describe the information that users request. A widely used
approach to deal with this problem is to expand the original
query with relevant terms [4, 5]. In this study, we tackle the
query expansion problem by defining new term-similarity
metric that is based on the electric resistant network. In
particular, this metric is derived from the effective resistance distances in between pairs of vertices in an undirected
weighted graph. In this graph, nodes represent terms and
they are linked together based on their co-occurrences. The
edge weights represent the strength of term co-occurrences
and are interpreted as electric resistances. Based on the resistance distances between pairs of terms, we demonstrate
how to derive the similarity between terms and groups of
terms. In this paper, we will discuss how to build the metric
from document collection and apply it in query expansion
for document retrieval tasks. We then present some of the
evaluation results on two TREC Genomic Track data. Finally we will conclude the paper and suggests some future
work.

Figure 1: Building an association network from documents
Electric Resistance Network
To define the metric for any pairs of nodes (terms or concepts) in the association graph, we propose to interpret the
weighted graph as a resistance network. Figure 2 illustrates
the resistance network obtained from a weighted association
network. In this case, the links and their weights in the
graph are replaced with connections with resistances corresponding to their weights. More specifically, a weight wj,k
in between nodes j, k in the original weighted graph defines
the electric conductance cj,k of the connection that is the re1
1
= wj,k
. We can
ciprocal of its electric resistance rj,k = cj,k
use the electric resistance network to calculate the effective
resistance in between any two nodes in the network. This
effective resistance is the basis of our distance (similarity)

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’10, July 19–23, 2010, Geneva, Switzerland.
ACM 978-1-60558-896-4/10/07.

715

metric. The metric is also referred as resistance distance
and comes with an intuitive random walk interpretation [1].

25% of 04 data to extract the association networks respectively.
We choose Lemur/Indri and its internal Pseudo
Table 1: TREC genomic track data statistics
Year #Abstracts #Test Queries
2003
525,932
50
2004
4,591,008
50
Relevance Feedback (PRF) query expansion module as the
baselines. We use the Mean Average Precision (MAP), to
measure the retrieval performance of various methods. All
query terms are connected by “#combine” and the weights
of expanded terms are assigned according to distance measures as w(x) = e−rQ,x . x is a expanded term, Q is the
set of original query terms, and rQ,x defines the resistance
distance between them.
We report results of query expansion with two proposed
n
metrics, rQ,x and its normalized version rQ,x
. We first combine our metrics with Lemur/Indir and compare them with
two baselines (See Tables 2). We use 5 expanded terms
in this experiment. Both proposed metrics perform much
(about 20%) better than the original Indri. More importantly, our metrics are much (over 9%) better than the PRF
expansion approach and the normalized metric is the best.

Figure 2: Building a resistance network from an association network
Calculating Effective Resistances
In general, the calculation of resistances (or conductances)
in between any two nodes in an electric network is more
complex and requires us to consider all serial and parallel
path connections in between them. Also in order to define a
proper metric we should define the distance for all possible
pairs. We calculate the resistances with the help of graph
Laplacian (L) [2], where L = A − D and A is the adjacency
matrix and D is the degree matrix of the graph. This approach is also used to defined the spectral transformation
kernel function [6].
The effective resistance in between nodes vj and vk can
+
+
+
+
be calculated as: rj,k = L+
j,j + Lk,k − Lj,k − Lk,j where L
is the pseudo-inverse of the graph Laplacian. In general,
the pseudo-inverse of a matrix A can be calculated from
the singular value decomposition of A = U ΣV ∗ as A+ =
U ∗ Σ+ V where Σ+ is the pseudo-inverse of Σ.

3.

Table 2: MAP of
Methods
Indri
Indri+PRF
Indri+rQ,x
n
Indri+rQ,x

USING THE DISTANCE METRIC IN IR

The effective resistance calculations define a distance metric in between nodes (terms or concepts) that can in turn
be used to support various inferences in the term space. We
extend this metric to define the distance in between a set of
(seed) terms S and a target t as the average
of the distances
P
1
between nodes in S and t: rS,t = |S|
si ∈S rsi ,t .

5.

1
|X−Q|

rQ,x
P

y∈X−Q rx,y

,

(1)

6.

where Q is a query, x is a term, and X is the set of all terms.
rQ,x is the resistance distance computed using the proposed
metric and it is normalized by the average distance between
x and all other non-query terms in the graph.

4.

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

We have presented a new term similarity metric that can
be easily defined using the document collection and applied
it successfully in query expansion for document retrieval
tasks. To the best of our knowledge this is the first study
that attempts to define the term similarity metric based on
electric resistance networks. In our evaluation, we defined
the similarity metrics on important concepts because the
data is from genomic domain. We would extend our study
to define the similarity on all terms and experiment it on
general document retrieval tasks.

With the above metric, we can find all relevant terms
to the original query terms. However, the metric may not
differentiate well the relevant terms that are specific to the
query from the rest of the relevant terms. To deal with it,
we borrow the idea from TF-IDF[3] and re-normalize the
distances between terms based on their relative distances:
n
rQ,x
=

various methods
03
04
0.243 0.216
0.258 0.228
0.282 0.251
0.291 0.261

REFERENCES

[1] P. G. Doyle and J. L. Snell. Random Walks and Electrical
Networks. The Mathematical Association of America,
Washington DC, 1984.
[2] D. J. Klein and M. Randić. Resistance distance. Journal of
Mathematical Chemistry, 12:81–95, 1993.
[3] G. Salton and C. Buckley. Term-weighting approaches in
automatic text retrieval. Information Processing and
Management, 5:513–523, 1988.
[4] J. Xu and B. W. Croft. Query expansion using local and global
document analysis. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGIR
conference, pages 4–11. ACM, 1996.
[5] Y. Xu, G. J. Jones, and B. Wang. Query dependent
pseudo-relevance feedback based on wikipedia. In Proceedings of
the 32th ACM SIGIR conference, pages 59–66. ACM, 2009.
[6] X. Zhu, J. Kandola, J. Lafferty, and Z. Ghahramani. Graph
kernels by spectral transforms. Semi-Supervised Learning, 2006.

EXPERIMENTS

We evaluate our method using TREC Genomic Track 2003
& 2004 datasets, which are consist of abstracts from Medline. Test queries in 03 data contains gene names, their
associated products (e.g., proteins), and their symbols and
synonyms. Test queries in 04 data are sentences and they
cover more general topics and involve more genomic concepts. We define our metric over only important terms:
gene/protein names for 03 data and 5000 terms with highest TF-IDF scores for 04 data. We use 30% of 03 data and

716

