Galean: Visualization of Geolocated News Events from
Social Media
Vanessa Peña-Araya, Mauricio Quezada, and Barbara Poblete
PRISMA Research Group
Department of Computer Science
University of Chile, Santiago, Chile

{vpena, mquezada, bpoblete}@dcc.uchile.cl
ABSTRACT

huge volume of information. Even if news events are detected and stored in local databases it is hard to retrieve
them later. This is mainly because the user does not always
know what he or she is looking for and, if so, might not know
the exact words to describe it.
In this paper we present Galean, an interactive visualization tool that represents events extracted from Twitter by
their geographical and temporal context. It aims to help
users explore and retrieve news events from OSN by the
political geographical entities that participate in it. In addition, it aims to reveal links between countries based on their
participation in particular news events, and behavioral patterns of the news. With this representation of news events,
we work to deliver an interactive tool that can answer questions such as what are the events related to this country on
this date? Or, in which news events do these two countries
participate together and how do they evolve?
Most state of the art tools that work with geographical
features of events extracted from OSN, aim to position them
over where they happened or aim to detect events happening in a particular place. For example, Sakaki et al. [3]
use the geographical metadata in tweets 1 to detect where
Categories and Subject Descriptors
the epicentre of an earthquake is and Watanabe et al. [5]
to identify small localized events. SensePlace2 [1] gives a
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information
Search and Retrieval—Information filtering; H.5.2 [Information broader view by also considering the locations that tweets
are about. However, this tool emphasizes dimensions of the
Interfaces and Representation]: User Interfaces—Graphevents more than the events themselves. As a result, these
ical user interfaces
tools ignore the relationships among countries that occur as
a consequence of real world events, and therefore do not alKeywords
low users to explore and query events by these relationships
Social media analysis; spatio-temporal analysis; geovisualas our tool does.
ization; text analysis; historical analysis
We hope Galean will help journalists and ordinary OSN
users explore and analyze news events from a historical point
1. MOTIVATION AND CONTRIBUTION
of view.
An event is usually understood as something that happened in a particular place and time. When a news event
2. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
happens, users from OSN react to them by sharing the inThe system architecture of Galean is designed in a threeformation or opinions they have about them. However, it
step
process:
is not an easy task to extract valuable knowledge from this
I.- Event identification: We detect news events that had
high media coverage by gathering messages from verified
news accounts from Twitter. The data set currently in use
contains news events starting from August 2013. The dePermission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
tection and storage processes of news events are conducted
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
every hour. Although Galean could use any news source, it
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
is defined currently to use a set of tweets as input.
For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author. Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
II.- Geo-temporal contextualization: besides the date in which
SIGIR ’15, August 09-13, 2015, Santiago, Chile
Online Social Networks (OSN) have changed the way information is produced and consumed. Organizing and retrieving unstructured data extracted from these platforms is not
an easy task. Galean is a visual and interactive tool that
aims to help journalists and historians, among others, analyze news events discussed on Twitter. In this tool, news
events are visually represented by the very countries from
where the news originated, the date when they happened
and their impact in the OSN. Galean considers countries as
entities, as opposed to mere geographical locations as most
of the tools in the state of the art. As a consequence, it
allows users to explore and retrieve news not only by their
geographical and temporal context, but also by the relationship among countries. With this tool users can search for
behavioral patterns of news events and observe how countries are associated in specific events. We expect our work to
become a public tool that helps conduct historical analyses
of social media news coverage over time.

ACM 978-1-4503-3621-5/15/08
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2766462.2767862.

1

1041

Tweets: messages posted in the Twitter OSN

Figure 1: Screenshot of Galean’s interface.
a news event was detected, we also extract the countries
from where the news originated, and the countries from
where Twitter users talk about the news. Both processes
use CLAVIN [4], an open source geoparser. A more detailed
description of the location-aware model of news events used
by Galean can be found in [2]. III.- Visualization: The
complete view of Galean is in Figure 1. To start using it,
the user must select a particular date of interest in the filter
area (section A, Figure 1). After this, all the news events
detected on that date will be displayed as a bubble on the
main map, as depicted in section B of Figure 1. Each of
them are positioned over the country that was involved in
the event with their size represent their impact in OSN, measured by volume of messages. When passing the cursor over
international events (orange bubbles), the links between all
the countries involved in the news event are revealed. By
clicking a bubble, additional information about the news it
represents appears in the view: miscellaneous data, propagation of the news over the world and tweets discussing the
event, in sections C, D and E respectively in Figure 1.

3.

It is possible to see that the event has a lot of impact on
Twitter, as shown in the map below. This map also highlighted in red that Malaysia, China and Australia were the
protagonists of that event. The filters available in the left
part of the view allow users to focus on news associated with
one or more countries. With these features, Galean allows
users to follow the evolution of a news event.

4.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors were partially supported by a FONDECYT
Grant 11121511 and the Millennium Nucleus Center for Semantic Web Research Grant NC120004. We also thank
Alexandre Bergel and Omar Miranda for their help in early
stages of this work.

References
[1] Alan M. MacEachren, Anuj Jaiswal, Anthony C. Robinson, Scott
Pezanowski, Alexander Savelyev, Prasenjit Mitra, Xiao Zhang,
and Justine Blanford. Senseplace2: Geotwitter analytics support
for situational awareness. In IEEE (VAST), 2011.
[2] Mauricio Quezada, Vanessa Peña-Araya, and Barbara Poblete.
Location-aware model for news events in social media. In SIGIR,
2015.

DEMONSTRATION

Galean is an exploratory tool. By selecting a date to start
with, the user has an idea of the news events that happened
that day by country and impact. With this basic information the user navigates and finds news events according to
what he or she is looking for. Figure 1 shows the overview of
news events for April 5th, 2014. The selected event in that
picture refers to the search of the Malaysian flight MH370
which disappeared March 4th of the same year. As can be
observed, that event relates Malaysia, China and Australia.
This is because a Chinese news agency declared at that time
that a signal, that may have come from the black box of the
missing flight, was received from a location near Australia.

[3] Takeshi Sakaki, Makoto Okazaki, and Yutaka Matsuo. Earthquake
shakes Twitter users: real-time event detection by social sensors.
In WWW, 2010.
[4] Berico Technologies. CLAVIN: Cartographic Location And Vicinity INdexer. http://clavin.bericotechnologies.com/, 2012–2013.
[5] Kazufumi Watanabe, Masanao Ochi, Makoto Okabe, and Rikio
Onai. Jasmine: a real-time local-event detection system based
on geolocation information propagated to microblogs. In CIKM,
2011.

1042

