Linse: A Distributional Semantics Entity Search Engine
Juliano Efson Sales1 , André Freitas2 , Siegfried Handschuh2 , Brian Davis1
1
Insight Centre for Data Analytics
National University of Ireland, Galway
2
Department of Computer Science and Mathematics
University of Passau

ABSTRACT

were used to describe target entities, categories or documents.
Shifting from unique words to multi-word expressions enables differences not only in vocabulary, but also in ordering
and compositionality, increasing the complexity in addressing the vocabulary mismatch. For example, Football Players
from United States would be an acceptable paraphrase for
American Footballers.
In order to address this problem, we have developed Linse,
an entity search engine which implements a compositionaldistributional semantic model to address the vocabulary problem for searching entities which describe complex categories
(e.g. ‘Buildings destroyed in the great fire of London and
not rebuilt’). This paper demonstrates the basic mechanisms and principles behind the Linse entity search engine,
showing how distributional semantics can support users in
crossing the query-data semantic gap.

Entering Football Players from United States when searching for American Footballers is an example of vocabulary
mismatch, which occurs when different words are used to
express the same concepts. In order to address this phenomenon for entity search targeting descriptors for complex
categories, we propose a compositional-distributional semantics entity search engine, which extracts semantic and commonsense knowledge from large-scale corpora to address the
vocabulary gap between query and data.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information
Search and Retrieval

Keywords
semantic search, entity search, distributional search.

2.

1.

Linse uses distributional semantic models [3] (semantic
models which are automatically built from large-scale corpora) as a principled mechanism to address the vocabulary
gap between users and data. On the top of the distributional
model, a compositional model based on a semantic pivoting
mechanism [5] is used to provide a semantic interpretation
of the query under the Knowledge Base (KB) of category
descriptors (NLCDs).
The Linse search engine decomposes every NLCD into a
semantic core and three types of specializations: (i) specializations of the core defined by noun, adjective or adverb
modifiers (e.g. ‘Tall Athletes’); (ii) specializations defined
by named entities (‘Athletes from Russia’) ; (iii) specializations defined by temporal references (‘Athletes born in the
80s’).
The Linse approach determines the constituency structure
of every NLCD during indexing time, generating a graph
containing a semantic core and its specializations, following
the semantic representation model for categories described
in [5]. Each core and specialization type is indexed in a
different distributional vector space, which maps to different
indexes.
The query interpretation process starts with the syntactic parsing of the query. The noun phrase head defines
the query semantic core. For the example query ‘ancestral wolves’, the semantic core is ‘wolves’. The semantic
core is sent as a query to the semantic core distributional
vector space which computes the distributional semantic re-

INTRODUCTION

Entities naming sets and categories are fundamental for
describing structured, semi-structured and unstructured data
and are present from Wikis to databases. The natural language descriptors associated with these entities are fundamental to support users searching, querying or browsing
structured or semi-structured data, which heavily depend
on them to find the desired piece of information.
Users searching over a set of natural language category descriptors (NLCDs) demand principled mechanisms to support crossing the semantic gap between the user queries and
the target NLCDs. The vocabulary problem occurs when different terms are used to express the same concepts. One of
the first studies in this direction shows that 80% of people
familiar with the same domain use different terms to name
the same concept[4]. Search over collections which do not
have high vocabulary redundancy is highly affected by the
vocabulary problem, since users do not know which words

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author. Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’15, August 09-13, 2015, Santiago, Chile
ACM 978-1-4503-3621-5/15/08.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2766462.2767871
Copyright 2015 ACM X-XXXXX-XX-X/XX/XX ...$15.00.

1045

THE COMPOSITIONALDISTRIBUTIONAL SEMANTIC MODEL

Figure 1: Screenshot of the Linse search result.
Queries → NLCDs
literature journals from austria → austrian literary magazines
movie premieres in 2008 → 2008 film festivals
obsolete justice institutions of connecticut → defunct law enforcement agencies of connecticut
norwegian top singles → number-one singles in norway
italian social movements → political movements in italy
repeating events which were initiated in 1875 → recurring
events established in 1875
horse enthusiasts from france → french racehorse owners and
breeders

latedness between the query term and the indexed semantic
cores, returning a set of most related semantic cores. For
the example query, the corresponding ‘canine’ semantic core
is returned.
The next step consists in selecting the next core modifier,
the adjective ‘ancestral’, sending it as a query to the subspace of specializations of ‘canine’. The use of ‘canine’ as
a semantic pivot supports the reduction of the dimensionality of the distributional space, by only looking into specializations which are applied to ‘canine’. Using the distributional semantic relatedness measure over the specializations
subspace, it returns ‘prehistoric canine’ as an output. The
ranking approach uses as a ranking score a weighted composition of the distributional relatedness measure between
each query term and the matching NLCD terms. In the
context of this work, Explicit Semantic Analysis [6] is used
as a semantic relatedness measure.
Figure 1 shows an screenshot of the result set for the example query, which displays the search box, the ranked list
of returned categories and their associated ranking scores.
The use of the distributional semantic relatedness as a ranking function provides a comprehensive semantic matching
mechanism [5] which is suitable for exploratory entity search
scenarios.
For the demonstration, a knowledge base of more than
300,000 category descriptors corresponding to the Wikipedia
category links were indexed. A set of natural language
queries over the knowledge base are demonstrated in an online video1 . Some of these queries with their corresponding
NLCD mappings are listed on Table 1.
Linse was implemented using Java over Lucene and used
the EasyESA framework [2] over the Wikipedia 2013 corpus.

3.

Table 1: Examples of query-NLCD mappings.
(automatically built from large-scale corpora) and comprehensive semantic matching strategy, which can be easily
transported to other languages. The proposed model can
be applied in different scenarios for entity search, varying
from tag recommendation systems to Question Answering
over Linked Data.

4.

5.

REFERENCES

[1] A. Freitas, et al., On the Semantic Representation and
Extraction of Complex Category Descriptors, In Proc. of
NLDB, 2014.
[2] D. Carvalho, et al., EasyESA: A Low-effort Infrastructure
for Explicit Semantic Analysis, In Proc. of ISWC, 2014.
[3] P. D. Turney and P. Pantel., From frequency to meaning:
Vector space models of semantics. J. Artif. Int. Res., 37(1)
: pp. 141 - 188, January 2010.
[4] G. W. Furnas et al., The vocabulary problem in
human-system communication. Commun. ACM, 30(11):
pp. 964 - 971, November 1987.
[5] A. Freitas, E. Curry, Natural Language Queries over
Heterogeneous Linked Data Graphs, In Proc. of IUI, 2014.
[6] E. Gabrilovich, S. Markovitch, Computing semantic
relatedness using Wikipedia-based explicit semantic
analysis. In Proc. of IJCAI, 2007.

SUMMARY

This paper demonstrated the Linse entity search engine.
Linse uses a compositional-distributional model to provide a
mechanism to search for complex category descriptors. The
use of distributional semantic models provides a low-effort
1

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This publication was supported by Science Foundation
Ireland (SFI) under Grant Number SFI/12/RC/2289.

http://treo.deri.org/linsedemo

1046

