Cross-Platform Question Routing
for Better Question Answering
Mossaab Bagdouri
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
College Park, MD, USA

mossaab@umd.edu
ABSTRACT

the taxonomy of the more general question types to this
group of professionals.
Routing questions needs new evaluation measures that
take in consideration various aspects beyond the traditional
dimension of relevance. For instance, for a user who is seeking opinions of “ordinary” people about non-factoid questions, informality of the answers is a constraint that might
be added to the evaluation [1]. The cost of wrong answers
is an additional dimension to the evaluation that is often
traded-oﬀ with response time. For example, a journalist
cannot accept an unverified report and might spend a long
time verifying it. On another hand, someone who is trying
to get recommendations for a nearby restaurant might trade
the correctness for a timely answer. Thus, we need to model
the likelihood of whether and when a question will get a
response, if a response contains an answer to that question
and to which extent that answer is correct and satisfies the
expectations of the asker.

The last two decades have made the Internet a major source
for knowledge seekers to fulfill their needs. Several tools and
platforms were developed to find answers to one’s questions
such as search engines and online encyclopedias. The wide
adoption of social media pushed the possibilities even further
by giving people the opportunity to stimulate the generation of answers that are not already present on the Internet.
Some of these are primarily community question answering
(CQA) services, while the others have a more general audience but can also be used to ask and answer questions.
Assessing which platform is best suitable for certain information need of a particular user, and subject to some specific constraints, is a problem that has seen little attention
(e.g. [3]). Hence, we consider cross-platform question routing to automatically suggest where an input question should
be asked or redirected to. Several stages are required to address this problem. First, we need to analyze the diﬀerences
between the questions asked on diﬀerent platforms. In fact,
on a search engine, a user would provide the least context
to the query. On a CQA website, she would summarize the
question in a title and provide more context in a description. On the other hand, the (online) identity of the asker
in a microblogging service is revealed to her friends, leading
to a higher exposure of context. For this stage, we gather
questions from diﬀerent platforms to train a classifier on the
distribution of question types [4] over these platforms. Services that are not restricted to questions and answers (e.g.,
Twitter) need special mining to find content that contains
questions. We will extend the work of [2] to find out which
posts are answer seeking questions.
Second, we need to characterize the users, as not all demographics have the same needs. For instance, the types
of information seeked by a journalist are arguably diﬀerent
from those of a teenager. Thus, we build some classifiers
that diﬀerentiate users based on the questions they might
ask. We apply some algorithms that we developed to retrieve the Twitter accounts of Arab journalists, and adapt

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information
Search and Retrieval

Keywords
Question Answering; Question Routing; Social Media

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was made possible by NPRP grant# NPRP 61377-1-25 from the Qatar National Research Fund (a member of Qatar Foundation). The statements made herein are
solely the responsibility of the author.

REFERENCES
[1] M. Bagdouri, D. W. Oard, and V. Castelli. CLIR for
informal content in Arabic forum posts. CIKM, 2014.
[2] M. Hasanain, T. Elsayed, and W. Magdy. Identification
of answer-seeking questions in Arabic microblogs.
CIKM, 2014.
[3] A. Oeldorf-Hirsch, B. Hecht, M. R. Morris, J. Teevan,
and D. Gergle. To search or to ask: The routing of
information needs between traditional search engines
and social networks. CSCW, 2014.
[4] Z. Zhao and Q. Mei. Questions about questions: An
empirical analysis of information needs on Twitter.
WWW, 2013.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the Owner/Author(s). Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’15, August 09-13, 2015, Santiago, Chile.
ACM 978-1-4503-3621-5/15/08.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2766462.2767849 .

1053

