Using Contextual Information to Understand
Searching and Browsing Behavior
Julia Kiseleva
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands
j.kiseleva@tue.nl

ABSTRACT

ing’—when users are surfing a website and we are predicting their
movements utilizing context.
The main research problem of this thesis is to investigate the
value of context in searching and browsing user behaviour on web:
How to discover, model and utilize contextual information in order to understand and improve users’ searching and browsing behaviour on web? The general research problem is broken down to
four specific research questions. We start by developing a general
analytic framework that views context-aware search from the system’s perspective: RQ1: How to define a general analytical framework for context-aware systems? This analytic part defines a general framework for modeling context, and introduces the notions of
optimal contextual models and useful contextual models. Next, we
look at the impact of specific contextual aspects: RQ2: What is the
impact of geographical location as a contextual information? [2]
RQ3: How to discover users behavioral aspects as contextual information? [3] We look at behavioral dynamics—changes in aggregated user behavioral features over time to detect changes in
user satisfaction and drifts in query intent: RQ4: How to define
and to detect changes in user satisfaction with retrieved search results? [4]. Our general research methodology is to conduct research
on realistic data from various on-line search services, ensuring our
results transfer to operational cases. This has a number of important consequences. Evaluation is key in operational environments,
and we follow the current state of the art approach to evaluation,
consisting of: (1) offline stage—where the progressive evaluation
(time-wise), cross validation (object-wise) and human judgments
procedures are employed; and (2) online stage—where the developed techniques are integrated into web systems. We employ traditional A/B and multivariate testing procedures providing reliable
estimates of the performance of the alternative approaches.
Acknowledgments This research is supported by STW (CAPA
project). Thanks to the ACM SIGIR for a Student Travel Grant.

There is great imbalance in the richness of information on the web
and the succinctness and poverty of search requests of web users,
making their queries only a partial description of the underlying
complex information needs. Finding ways to better leverage contextual information and make search context-aware holds the promise to dramatically improve the search experience of users. We conducted a series of studies to discover, model and utilize contextual
information in order to understand and improve users’ searching
and browsing behavior on the web. Our results capture important
aspects of context under the realistic conditions of different online
search services, aiming to ensure that our scientific insights and
solutions transfer to the operational settings of real world applications.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.3.3 [Information Storage and
Retrieval]: Information Search and Retrieval—Search process
General Terms: Algorithms, Performance, Experimentation

1.

CONTEXTUALIZING SEARCH

Modern search still relies on the query-response paradigm, which
is characterized by a sharp contrast between the richness of data
in the index, and the relative poverty of information in the query,
usually expressed in a few keywords to capture a complex need.
This is particularly true in online search services, where the same
query may be observed from many users, with considerable variations in their search intents. Contextual information is the obvious
route to try to restore the balance, and behavioral data related to
user’s searching and browsing activities provides new opportunities to model contextual aspects of user needs.
The importance of contextual information in search applications
has been recognised by researchers and practitioners in many disciplines, including recommendation systems, information retrieval,
ubiquitous and mobile computing, and marketing. Context-aware
systems [1] adapt to users’ operations and thus aim at improving the
usability and effectiveness by taking context into account. In this
thesis we consider two types of behavior: (1) ‘searching’—when
users are issuing queries and we are trying to improve search results
(SERP) taking context of sessions into account; and (2) ‘brows-

References
[1] J. Kiseleva. Context mining and integration into predictive
web analytics. In WWW (Companion Volume), pages 383–388,
2013.
[2] J. Kiseleva, H. T. Lam, M. Pechenizkiy, and T. Calders. Predicting current user intent with contextual markov models. In
ICDM Workshops, 2013.
[3] J. Kiseleva, H. T. Lam, M. Pechenizkiy, and T. Calders. Discovering temporal hidden contexts in web sessions for user
trail prediction. In Proceedings of WWW (Companion Volume),
pages 1067–1074. ACM, 2013.
[4] J. Kiseleva, E. Crestan, R. Brigo, and R. Dittel. Modelling and
detecting changes in user satisfaction. In Proceeding of CIKM,
pages 1449–1458, 2014.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be
honored. For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author(s). Copyright is held by the
owner/author(s).
SIGIR’15, August 09–13, 2015, Santiago, Chile.
ACM 978-1-4503-3621-5/15/08.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2766462.2767852.

1059

