Controversy Detection and Stance Analysis
Shiri Dori-Hacohen
Center for Intelligent Information Retrieval
School of Computer Science
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, Massachusetts

shiri@cs.umass.edu

ABSTRACT

2.

Alerting users about controversial search results can encourage critical literacy, promote healthy civic discourse and
counteract the “filter bubble” effect. Additionally, presenting information to the user about the different stances or
sides of the debate can help her navigate the landscape of
search results. Our existing work made strides in the emerging niche of controversy detection and analysis; we propose
further work on automatic stance detection.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Storage and Retrieval —Information filtering, Clustering
Keywords: controversy detection, stance detection, critical literacy

We propose an additional contribution: automatic stance
extraction. We hypothesize that the stances of controversial
topics can be automatically extracted from Wikipedia; we
further posit that such extracted stances can be used to
classify web pages and queries, determining whether their
author or issuer holds these stances.
Methodology. We intend to extract stances (sides of the
debate) for controversial topics using Wikipedia: for example, using the words inserted and deleted from the article, or
looking at the editors graph. Finding ground truth for this
problem is challenging; however, we have found a dataset
that can be used to generate evaluations.
Issues for Discussion. Given the above, we’d like to
discuss the definition of controversy, and challenges in evaluation of the stance extraction problem.

1.

MOTIVATION

The challenge of navigating different sides of a debate on
a controversial topic is a cognitive burden to the user, an
increasingly challenging task with social and ethical implications [6]. We present existing work in the field and propose a
further contribution that will facilitate healthy debates and
serve users’ information needs with regards to controversial
topics: automated stance extraction for controversial topics,
which will detect the various sides of the debate.
Related Work. The problem of controversy detection
has been receiving increased attention (see [6] for a survey).
In addition to detecting the controversial topic, another challenge is understanding what is controversial about it [1, 2];
a comprehensive approach for detecting stances of a debate
has not yet been proposed. Recent work has used manually
extracted stances which were used as classifiers to investigate
users’ opinions [7]. Further advances are needed in order to
present users with explicit stances on controversial topics.
Our Contributions. We introduced the problem of detecting controversial topics on the web [3], and suggested
a weakly-supervised algorithm to solve it [4]; we examined
a hypothesis that controversies occur in neighborhoods of
related topics, demonstrating that controversy exhibits homophily and improving the current state of the art [5].

3.

PROPOSED RESEARCH

CONCLUSION

There are multiple subtleties involved with information
seeking on controversial topics [6]. We describe some work
already completed as well as additional proposed work, which
can inform users of the controversy level of their search terms
and assist their understanding of different stances or opinions on such topics.
Acknowledgments. This work was supported in part by the
Center for Intelligent Information Retrieval and in part by NSF
grant number IIS-1217281. Any opinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are the author’s and do not necessarily reflect those of the sponsor.

4.
[1]
[2]

[3]
[4]
[5]

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be
honored. For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author(s). Copyright is held by the
owner/author(s).
SIGIR’15, August 09-13, 2015, Santiago, Chile.
ACM 978-1-4503-3621-5/15/08.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2766462.2767844 .

[6]

[7]

1057

REFERENCES

R. Awadallah, M. Ramanath, and G. Weikum. Harmony and
Dissonance: Organizing the People’s Voices on Political
Controversies. Proc. WSDM, 2012.
S. Das and A. Lavoie. Automated inference of point of view
from user interactions in collective intelligence venues. In
Workshop on Social Computing and User Generated
Content, EC 2013.
S. Dori-Hacohen and J. Allan. Detecting controversy on the
web. In Proc. CIKM, 2013.
S. Dori-Hacohen and J. Allan. Automated Controversy
Detection on the Web. In Proc. ECIR, 2015.
S. Dori-Hacohen, D. Jensen, and J. Allan. Stacked Models
for Controversy Detection in Wikipedia. Under review, 2015.
S. Dori-Hacohen, E. Yom-Tov, and J. Allan. Navigating
Controversy as a Complex Search Task. Proc. Workshop on
Supporting Complex Search Tasks, ECIR 2015.
E. Yom-Tov, S. T. Dumais, and Q. Guo. Promoting civil
discourse through search engine diversity. Social Science
Computer Review, 2013.

