Time Pressure in Information Search
Anita Crescenzi
School of Information and Library Science, University of North Carolina
Chapel Hill, NC, USA

amcc@email.unc.edu

Categories and Subject Descriptors

complicated when the amount of time that a participant
can interact with a system is constrained (e.g., time limits
or system delays). Further, differences in search outcome
measures (e.g., quality or number of documents found) may
reflect the time spent searching as much as other experimental manipulations and time-normalization may be required
[7]. Finally, time spent searching as an outcome measure is
difficult to interpret [2].
The findings from this research are expected provide insight into time-pressured information search. A better understanding of time-pressured information search may ultimately influence search system design and better support
time-pressured searchers.

H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information
Search and Retrieval—Search Process

Keywords
Search behavior; Time pressure

1.

ABSTRACT

The primary purpose of this research is to explore the impact of perceived time pressure on search behaviors, searcher
perceptions of the search system and the search experience.
Are there observable behavioral changes when a searcher is
time-pressured? To what extent are search behavior differences attributable to objective experimental manipulation
versus to the subjective experience of time pressure? An
important secondary purpose of this work is to identify appropriate outcome measures that allow for the comparison
of session-level search behaviors when time is manipulated.
This proposal builds on Crescenzi, Kelly and Azzopardi [3]
and is intended to be part of a multi-method line of inquiry
examining time-pressured information-seeking.
Why is it important to study time? Research has shown
that time is an important element of information retrieval
[4] and information-seeking [6]. Recent work has examined
several temporal factors in interactive information retrieval
(IIR) research including system response time [1], time limits [9], and the urgency of the information need [8]. While
impact of perceived time pressure on search behavior is not
well understood, there has been a great deal of research on
how time pressure impacts decision-making. This research
has shown that when making a decision under time pressure,
people often reduce the amount of time to process pieces of
information, work faster, focus on more general information
or even satisfice [5]. As information search involves numerous decisions, examining similar adaptations may be present
in time-pressured information search.
Time is also an important factor to consider in search and
system evaluation. Comparison of interaction measures is

2. REFERENCES
[1] I. Arapakis, X. Bai, and B. B. Cambazoglu. Impact of
response latency on user behavior in web search. In
Proc. of the 37th ACM SIGIR conference, pages
103–112, 2014.
[2] P. Borlund, S. Dreier, and K. Byström. What does time
spent on searching indicate? In Proc. of the 4th IIiX
Symposium, pages 184–193, 2012.
[3] A. Crescenzi, D. Kelly, and L. Azzopardi. Time
pressure and system delays in information search. In
Proc. of the 38th ACM SIGIR conference, 2015.
[4] P. Ingwersen and K. Järvelin. Information retrieval in
context. ACM SIGIR Forum, 39(2):31, Dec. 2005.
[5] J. W. Payne, J. R. Bettman, and E. J. Johnson. The
Adaptive Decision Maker. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1993.
[6] R. Savolainen. Time as a context of information
seeking. Library & Info. Sci. Research, 28(1):110–127,
Mar. 2006.
[7] N. J. Taylor, A. R. Dennis, and J. W. Cummings.
Situation normality and the shape of search: The
effects of time delays and information presentation on
search behavior. J. of the A. Soc. for Info. Sci. and
Tech., 64(5):909–928, 2013.
[8] J. Teevan, K. Collins-Thompson, R. W. White, S. T.
Dumais, and Y. Kim. Slow search: Information
retrieval without time constraints. In Proc. of the 7th
HCIR Symposium, pages 1–10, New York, New York,
USA, 2013. ACM Press.
[9] A. Tombros, I. Ruthven, and J. M. Jose. How users
assess web pages for information seeking. J. of the
American Society for Info. Sci. and Tech.,
56(4):327–344, 2005.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be
honored. For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author(s). Copyright is held by the
owner/author(s).
SIGIR’15, August 09-13, 2015, Santiago, Chile.
ACM 978-1-4503-3621-5/15/08.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2766462.2767851.

1055

