Promoting User Engagement and Learning in Amorphous
Search Tasks
Piyush Arora
ADAPT Research Centre, School of Computing
Dublin City University, Dublin 9, Ireland
parora@computing.dcu.ie
ABSTRACT
Much research in information retrieval (IR) focuses on optimization of the rank of relevant retrieval results for single
shot ad hoc IR tasks. Relatively little research has been
carried out on user engagement to support more complex
search tasks. We seek to improve user engagement for IR
tasks by providing richer representation of retrieved information. It is our expectation that this strategy will promote implicit learning within search activities. Specifically,
we plan to explore methods of finding semantic concepts
within retrieved documents, with the objective of creating
improved document surrogates. Further, we would like to
study search effectiveness in terms of different facets such as
the user’s search experience, satisfaction, engagement and
learning. We intend to investigate this in an experimental
study, where our richer document representations are compared with the traditional document surrogates for the same
user queries.
Categories and Subject Descriptors:H.3.3[Information
Search and Retrieval]: search process, H.5.2[Information Interfaces and Presentation]: Interaction styles
Keywords: interactive IR; learning; engagement.

1.

RESEARCH PROPOSAL

Searching information on the web has become an indispensable part of our daily activities. From finding answers
to our daily questions to satisfying our curiosity, and increasingly, for educational purposes. We look towards the web
to learn about different topics through MOOCs, wikipedia,
and general web content. At present, search engines are optimized for look-up tasks and not for activities that require
more sustained interactions with information. Current IR
systems are not generally configured to support long search
sessions [2]. We would anticipate that, in a longer session, a
user might benefit from having the results change dynamically based on their engagement and interactions.
In our work we plan to explore the relationship between
complex search tasks and the manner in which information is
presented to the user to enable more active engagement and

improve learning. As noted in [1], there are several factors
which play an important role in learning such as a) prior
knowledge, b) coherence, c) motivation and d) knowledge
actualization. We want to focus on the coherence aspect in
our research. The main question we will investigate in our
work is: How can search results be presented with respect to
document content to improve user engagement?
Our ultimate goal is to improve user engagement with retrieved information. It is our expectation that understanding document similarities and differences at a semantic level
can help us to create better document surrogates (e.g. in
terms of document summaries, topics, visualisations) which
may in turn improve user engagement.
Li and Belkin [3] propose a faceted approach for conceptualizing search tasks. Following this categorisation, Jian et
al. [2] investigate two facets of search tasks: product and
goal. The product of a search task can be factual or intellectual and the goal of a search task can be either specific
or amorphous. Thus they study four different types of task:
known item (factual + specific), known subject (factual +
amorphous), interpretive (intellectual + specific), and exploratory (intellectual + amorphous). We plan to adopt
their categorization in our study of supporting and enhancing user engagement, focusing on known subject, interpretive and exploratory tasks. It is our hope that the content
representations proposed in our research will form the basis
of mechanisms to support more engaging search experiences
in future search engines.
Acknowledgments: This work is supervised by Jennifer
Foster and Gareth J.F.Jones. This research is supported by
Science Foundation Ireland (SFI) as a part of the CNGL
Centre for Global Intelligent Content at DCU (Grant No:
12/CE/I2267).

2.

REFERENCES

[1] L. Freund, H. O’Brien, and R. Kopak. Getting the big
picture: supporting comprehension and learning in
search. 2014.
[2] J. Jiang, D. He, and J. Allan. Searching, browsing, and
clicking in a search session: changes in user behavior by
task and over time. In Proc. of SIGIR, pages 607–616,
2014.
[3] Y. Li and N. J. Belkin. A faceted approach to
conceptualizing tasks in information seeking.
Information Processing & Management,
44(6):1822–1837, 2008.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be
honored. For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author(s). Copyright is held by the
owner/author(s).
SIGIR’15, August 09-13, 2015, Santiago, Chile.
ACM 978-1-4503-3621-5/15/08.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2766462.2767848.

1051

