If SIGIR had an Academic Track, what would be in it?
David Hawking
Microsoft (Bing)
Canberra, Australia

david.hawking@acm.org

ABSTRACT

BIO

It used to be the case that very little industry research was
presented at SIGIR. Now the balance has radically changed –
many accepted papers have industry authors and many rely
on industry data sets – To the extent that a leading academic member of the SIGIR community has light-heartedly
proposed the creation of an Academic Track.
Behind the levity lies the important question of how a researcher can make a meaningful contribution to the field, in
the absence of petabyte-scale sets of documents and massive
user-interaction logs. Theoretical contributions can revolutionize thinking, but have greatest impact when applicable
in practice, and when empirically validated.
In my years at Funnelback and more recently at Microsoft
I have been very aware of high-impact but not-well-solved IR
problems involving relatively tiny datasets. Many of them
are characterized by sparsity of user interaction data and are
hence not well-suited to simple machine learning approaches
or to large scale A/B testing. My talk will illustrate and attempt to characterize these problems and to suggest fruitful
areas for academic research.
If time permits, I will mention some areas in which academic research has contributed to current large-scale industry practice.

David Hawking is an applied scientist in the Relevance & Intent
group of Microsoft. He is based
in Canberra and works on Bing.
David has been an IR researcher since 1991 and, among
other things, has worked on parallel IR, distributed IR, term
proximity models, efficiency, automatic assessment of health
webpage quality, evaluation, test
collection development, web IR
and enterprise search. In 1998
he left the Australian National University to continue his
research at Australia’s largest research organization CSIRO.
CSIRO’s industrial focus led to the commercialisation of the
team’s research and eventually to the spinning off of the
Funnelback internet and enterprise search company in late
2005. David joined the spinoff as Chief Scientist in 2008 and
worked in that role until joining Microsoft in 2013.
David continues as an adjunct professor at the Australian
National University and has graduated nine PhDs. He has
authored around a hundred publications in the IR area (see
david-hawking.net/publications.shtml) and twice served
as program chair for SIGIR. He chaired the Industry Track
at SIGIR 2014 and was Web Track coordinator at the international Text Retrieval Conference (TREC) from 19972004. In this role he was responsible for the creation and
distribution of widely used text retrieval test collections. He
holds an honorary doctorate from the University of Neuchâtel (Switzerland), the 2005 Chris Wallace award (Australasia) for computer science research and the 2012 Tony Kent
Strix award (jointly with Doug Cutting).

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information
Search and Retrieval—relevance feedback

Keywords
Open IR problems for academics.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author. Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’15, August 09 - 13, 2015, Santiago, Chile.
ACM 978-1-4503-3621-5/15/08
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2766462.2776784.

1077

