WeChat Search & Headline: Sogou Joins Force with
Tencent on Mobile Search
Chao Liu
Sogou Inc.

liuchao@sogou-inc.com
ABSTRACT

BIO
Chao Liu is the Chief Scientist,
and the General Manager of the
Data Science Department in
Sogou Inc. Dr. Liu is elected to
China
"Top
1000
Young
Talents", the highest honor for
oversea researchers returning to
China. Before coming back to
China, he was a researcher and
the manager of the Data
Intelligence Group in Microsoft
Research at Redmond (MSRRedmond). His research has
been focused on Web search/ads and data mining, with
about 40 conference/journal publications and many
research results transferred to Microsoft Bing, Tencent SoSo,
and Sogou Search engines. Dr. Liu has been on the program
and organizing committees of many conferences, including
SIGIR, SIGKDD, WWW, etc., and actively campaigns for the
mutualism between academia and industry. Dr. Liu earned
his PhD in Computer Science from the University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign in 2007, and B.S. in Computer
Science from Peking University (China) in 2003.

Tencent Inc. is the biggest social network company in China. Its
WeChat and QQ boast of 700 million and 800 million monthly
active users (MAU), respectively. Sogou Inc., on the other hand,
is a search leader in China, being the No. 2 and No. 3 on
mobile/PC search market, respectively. This talk introduces how
Tencent and Sogou join force on the battele of mobile search.
Specifically, we discuss two products, namely WeChat Search
and WeChat Headline, and illustrate how they leverage the
strength of both companies to take the market. We further dive
under the hood, and examine technical problems and solutions. In
particular, we focus on unique aspects due to the particularities of
WeChat, e.g., millions of articles generated from about 1 million
official accounts, which are forwarded and broadcasted by
hundreds of millions of users across the world. Some problems,
e.g., de-duplication and ranking, might be similar to traditional
IR, but some other aspects are not. In the end, we put forward
some challenges for open discussion, and solicit comments from
academia and fellow practitioners.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
J.4 SOCIAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES

General Terms
Algorithms, Design, Human Factors

Keywords
Social Search, Mobile Search.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice
and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of
this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author(s).
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
SIGIR '15, August 09-13, 2015, Santiago, Chile.
ACM 978-1-4503-3621-5/15/08.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2766462.2776781

1079

