SIRIP 2015 Chairs’ Welcome
It is our great pleasure to welcome you to the SIGIR Symposium on Information Retrieval in
Practice (SIRIP 2015). The goal of SIRIP is to bring together information retrieval researchers,
practitioners, analysts, and consumers, and to achieve knowledge transfer across these boundaries.
It is our hope that everyone who attends SIRIP walks away with new understanding and at least
one new idea to think about or explore. SIRIP 2015 is held on the third day of the main SIGIR
conference, on Wednesday, August 12, 2015, in Santiago, Chile. SIRIP is attended by people
registered for the main conference as well as other interested practitioners who chose register for it
alone. The SIRIP program consists of three hour and half long sessions that include a mix of
invited presentations, refereed papers, and a panel presentation.
Invited Talks
As has been traditional for the SIGIR Industry Track in past years, this year we invited preeminent
industry practitioners to talk about interesting real world problems and emerging new technologies
or approaches. Invited speakers were selected to represent a diverse set of companies and topics,
including institutions that are already well represented within the IR community (such as
Microsoft, Yahoo, Baidu, and Yandex) and those that represent new or emerging areas of interest
(including LinkedIn, Bloomberg, and Sogou).


From Web Search Relevance to Vertical Search Relevance, Yi Chang (Yahoo)



Finding Money in the Haystack: Information Retrieval at Bloomberg, Jonathan Dorando
(Bloomberg)



If SIGIR Had an Academic Track, What Would Be in It? David Hawking (Microsoft)



WeChat Search and Headline: Tencent and Sogou Join Forces on Mobile Search and the
Challenges We Face, Chao Liu (Sogou)



Structure, Personalization, Scale: A Deep Dive into LinkedIn Search, Asif Makhani
(LinkedIn)



Location in Commercial Search Engines, Vanessa Murdock (Microsoft)



Challenges and Opportunities in Online Evaluation of Search Engines, Pavel Serdyukov
(Yandex)



Lower Search Cost, Dou Shen (Baidu)

Refereed Papers
In addition to invited talks, we also solicited the submission of short (4-page) research papers
contributing original results obtained in an industry setting or with obvious industry impact. These
were curated by the SIRIP chairs and are published as part of the SIGIR proceedings. The number
of accepted refereed papers was, of necessity, small. We received eight high quality submissions
from practitioners at institutions around the world, and were able to accept half of them for
presentation at SIRIP. Acceptance criteria included an assessment of likely impact and interest to
an industry audience, as well as originality, technical quality and expression.


Practical Lessons for Gathering Quality Labels at Scale, Omar Alonso (Microsoft)



Incremental Sampling in Query Logs, Ricardo Baeza-Yates (Yahoo)

iii
1071



Where to Go on Your Next Trip? Optimizing Travel Destinations Based on User Preferences,
Julia Kiseleva (Eindhoven University of Technology), Melanie Mueller (Booking.com),
Lucas Bernardi (Booking.com), Chad Davis (Booking.com), Ivan Kovacek (Booking.com),
Mats Stafseng Einarsen (Booking.com), Jaap Kamps (University of Amsterdam), Alexander
Tuzhilin (New York University), and Djoerd Hiemstra (University of Twente)



Bringing Order to the Job Market: Efficient Job Offer Categorization in E-Recruitment,
Emmanuel Malherbe (Multiposting), Mario Cataldi (Université Paris 8), and Andrea Ballatore
(University of California, Santa Barbara)

Panel Presentation
In addition to presentations, this year’s SIRIP schedule includes a panel presentation designed to
foster discussion and encourage all attendees to think about the avenues that they might use to
influence the real-world search tools that people currently use. The panel features prominent
academics with rich and varied experiences that have led to significant industrial impact.


Having Industrial Impact from Academia. Moderator: Jimmy Lin (University of Maryland)

We hope that you find the SIRIP program interesting and thought-provoking, and that the
symposium provides you with a valuable opportunity to share ideas with other researchers and
practitioners from institutions around the world.

Hang Li

Jaime Teevan

SIGIR ’15 Industry Track Chair
Huawei, China

SIGIR ’15 Industry Track Chair
Microsoft Research, USA

iv
1072

