Finding Money in the Haystack: Information Retrieval at
Bloomberg
Jonathan J. Dorando

Konstantine Arkoudas

Parth Vasa

Bloomberg L.P.
New York, NY, USA

Bloomberg L.P.
New York, NY, USA

Bloomberg L.P.
New York, NY, USA

jdorando@bloomberg.net

karkoudas@bloomberg.net
pvasa@bloomberg.net
Gary Kazantsev
Gideon Mann

Bloomberg L.P.
New York, NY, USA

Bloomberg L.P.
New York, NY, USA

gkazantsev@bloomberg.net

gmann16@bloomberg.net

ABSTRACT

At Bloomberg, we have been addressing these problems
over the past four years in the search and discoverability
group, heavily leveraging the insights from the academic and
open-source communities to apply to our problems. We’ll
discuss about our efforts in Natural Language Question &
Answer (NLQA), learning to rank, federated search, crowd
sourcing, and how this all comes together to make search
effective for our users.

The financial markets are a rich domain for search, and it
is not simple to serving the entire scope of financial professionals, who make their living on accurate, timely, and deep
information. The data sources are many and disparate. This
includes domains with rich structured data such as company
and security attributes, textual data like research reports,
and time sensitive news stories. Not only is the domain
complicated, but some of the techniques that work for web
search have to be adapted and reconsidered in an enterprise
context with fewer eyeballs but just as complicated questions.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.
SIGIR’15, August 09 - 13, 2015, Santiago, Chile.
c 2015 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3621-5/15/08 ...$15.00.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2766462.2776782.

1075

