Location in Search
Vanessa Murdock
Microsoft
1 Microsoft Way
Redmond WA

vanmur@microsoft.com
ABSTRACT

General Terms

As users turn increasingly to handheld devices to find
information, the research community has focused on real-time
location signals (GPS signals) to improve search engine
effectiveness. Location signals have been investigated for
predicting businesses the user will frequent[3], assigning
geographic coordinates to media files[1], and to improve mobile
search ranking[2].

Algorithms, Experimentation.

Keywords
User location, local search, contextual ranking.

BIO
Vanessa Murdock is a Principal Applied Researcher at Microsoft
for the past three years. Her research focuses on leveraging social
media to improve local search.

While the increased focus on real-time user location has produced
excellent research, there remains a gap between the capabilities
being developed in the research community, and the capabilities
being developed by commercial search engines. The core of this
discrepancy between the advances in research and advances in
industry is understanding the user’s location.

Previously Dr. Murdock worked at Yahoo! Research in
Barcelona, Spain, as a Senior Research Scientist. At Yahoo!
Research she led the Geographic Context and Experience Group,
doing research on topics related to geographic information
retrieval and user-generated content. She has been awarded 8
patents, and has more than 30 patent applications pending,
resulting in a Master Inventor Award from Yahoo! (2012). She
received the OAA Award for Outstanding Achievement by a
Young Alum from the University of Massachusetts in 2014.

The vast majority of research on user location assumes that the
user’s location is known, because the user has provided a GPS
signal. For many systems, there is no GPS signal available. The
user may choose not enable it, or the system chooses not to
prompt the user for the location because doing so degrades the
user experience. For these interactions, the system relies on the
user’s IP address for location information.

Dr. Murdock publishes regularly in the field of information
retrieval, and is active in the scientific community, reviewing for
conferences and journals, organizing workshops and tutorials, and
serving on the organizing committees for international
conferences.

Further, much of the current research uses public geocoded data
such as Foursquare (http://www.foursquare.com visited June
2015), and Twitter (http://www.twitter.com visited June 2015).
These data are an incomplete picture of places a user may visit,
and are potentially biased in their representation of actual users.
The information contained in these data is not the same type of
information typically available to a commercial search engine.

Dr. Murdock received a B.S. in Computer Science from Colorado
State University in 2001 and an M.S. and Ph.D. in Computer
Science from the University of Massachusetts Amherst in 2005
and 2006, respectively. Dr. Murdock also holds a Bachelor of
Music, and worked as a professional musician for 10 years prior
to her career in computer science.

In this talk we discuss gaps between current research on location,
and industry advances in using location signals to improve search
results. We focus on user location as one example of a gap
between research and development.

REFERENCES

Categories and Subject Descriptors

[1] Larson, M., Soleymani, M., Serdyukov, P., Rudinac, S.,
Wartena, C., Murdock, V., Friedland, G., Ordelman, R., and
Jones, G. Automatic tagging and geotagging in video
collections and communities. In Proceedings of the 1st ACM
International Conference on Multimedia Retrieval (ICMR).
2011.

H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search
and Retrieval –retrieval models.

[2] Lv, Y., Lymberopoulos, D., and Wu, Q. An exploration of
ranking heuristics in mobile local search. In Proceedings of
SIGIR. Portland, 2012.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this
work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’15, August 09-13, 2015, Santiago, Chile
ACM 978-1-4503-3621-5/15/08.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2766462.2776783

[3] Shaw, B., Shea, J., Sinha, S., and Hogue, A. Learning to rank
for spatiotemporal search. In Proceedings of WSDM. Rome,
2013.

1083

