SIGIR 2015 Tutorials Chair’s Welcome
This year’s conference received twelve submissions, of which eight were accepted, and one was
extended to an additional half-day. The decision was based on criteria of relevance to the SIGIR
community, core quality and experience of presenters. The accepted tutorials include three fullday tutorials, and two morning-afternoon sequences. It was important for us to build a diverse yet
comprehensive program that would address the needs of all attendees from newcomers, eager to
acquire critical knowledge, to experts curious about side or emerging areas of research in
Information Retrieval.
To this effect we made sure to cover a wide range of topics from fundamental ones (“Revisiting
the Foundations of IR”) to timely ones such as formal models (“Building and Using Models for
Information Seeking, Search and Retrieval”), the handling of verbose queries (“Information
Retrieval with Verbose Queries”), or related to leveraging Wikipedia (“Exploiting Wikipedia for
Information Retrieval Tasks”.) We also decided to allow for non-mainstream topics in order to
expand the horizons of Information Retrieval practitioners and researchers with a full-day tutorial
on “Music Retrieval and Recommendation”.
In addition, we wanted to offer more flexibility to attendees in building their own personalized
program as well as learning about timely topics. We thus included this year two morningafternoon sequence of half-day tutorials. One such sequence deals with click models, starting in
the morning with “An Introduction to Click Models for Web Search”, while the afternoon session
dives deep into “Advanced Click Models and their Applications to IR”. The other sequence covers
the always-critical topic of IR evaluation, with a morning session dealing with “Designing an Endto-End Evaluation Pipeline”, and an afternoon session tackling user behavior in “Modeling User
Behavior for Measuring Effectiveness”. Note that in order to offer more flexibility to attendees,
the morning and afternoon sessions of these two tutorials are each considered as stand-alone
tutorials and can be taken independently.
We would like to thank the seventeen presenters, from Academia and Industry, who will travel to
Chile from various parts of the world in order to give their tutorials, namely from Australia (Guido
Zuccon), Austria (Peter Knees and Markus Schedl), Canada (Charles Clarke and Mark Smucker),
India (Manish Gupta), Israel (Nir Ofek, Victor Makarenkov, and Bracha Shapira), United
Kingdom (Leif Azzopardi, Emine Yilmaz), The Netherlands (Ilya Markov and Maarten de Rijke),
Switzerland (Aleksandr Chuklin) and the United States (Michael Bendersky, Paul Kantor and Jin
Young Kim).
We hope that you will find this program interesting and educational and that it will provide you
with a valuable opportunity to learn from some of the most famous and experienced researchers in
the ever-evolving field of information retrieval.

Yoelle Maarek
SIGIR 2015 Tutorials Chair
Vice-Chair SIGIR EC
VP Research EMEA, Yahoo Labs, Israel

1105

