Advanced Click Models and their Applications to IR
SIGIR 2015 Tutorial
Aleksandr Chuklin

Ilya Markov

Maarten de Rijke

Google Switzerland &
University of Amsterdam
Zürich, Switzerland

ISLA, University of Amsterdam
Amsterdam, The Netherlands

ISLA, University of Amsterdam
Amsterdam, The Netherlands

a.chuklin@uva.nl

i.markov@uva.nl

ABSTRACT

junior or senior. Many of the click models available today have been
proposed by different industrial and academic research groups—one
of the key aims of our proposed tutorial is to bring these together
and offer a unified perspective. To achieve this, we describe the
basic click models, inference methods and evaluation principles. We
supplement this with an account of available datasets and packages
plus a live demo based on these. We also present click model
applications accompanied by examples.
We expect the tutorial to be useful for both researchers and practitioners that either want to develop new click models, use them in
their own research in other areas or apply the models described here
to improve actual search systems.

This tutorial concerns with more advanced and more recent topics
in the area of click models. Here, we discuss recent developments
in the area with a particular focus on applications of click models.
The tutorial features a guest talk and a live demo where participants
have a chance to build their own advanced click model.
While this is the second part of the two half-day tutorials, it is
not required for participants to attend the first one. In the beginning
of this part, a short introduction to basic click models will be given
so that all participants share a common vocabulary. Then, recent
advances in click models will be discussed.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: H.3.3 Information Search
and Retrieval

Keywords
Click models; web search

1.

derijke@uva.nl

INTRODUCTION

Click models, probabilistic models of the behavior of search
engine users, have been studied extensively by the information
retrieval community during the last five years.
A good body of work has been published on click models over
the past 5 to 10 years. Importantly, the area continues to be an
active one, with new models aimed at describing and/or predicting
behavioral data being proposed at each of the main information
retrieval conferences (SIGIR, WSDM, WWW, CIKM) over the past
few years. There is also a fair number of publications that use click
models presented in the main information retrieval conferences as
well as ACM journals such as TOIS. All this indicates that there is
a substantial and continued level of interest in the topic.
Indeed, we now have a handful of basic click models, inference
methods, evaluation principles and applications for click models,
that form the building blocks of ongoing research efforts in the area.
The time is right to organize and present this material to a broad
audience of interested information retrieval researchers, whether

2.

OBJECTIVES

A large body of research on click models has been developed.
This research has improved our understanding of user behavior in
web search and facilitated the usage of click models in various
search-related tasks. Current studies use a broad range of notations
and terminology, perform experiments using different and mostly
proprietary datasets, do not detail the model inference procedures
used and, thus, do not provide a general systematic view on the
research area. This, in turn, slows down the development and hinders the application of click models. The goal of this tutorial is to
bring together current efforts in the area, summarize the research
performed so far and give a holistic view on existing click models
for web search. More specifically, the aims of this tutorial are the
following:
1. Describe existing click models in a unified way, i.e., using
common notation and terminology, so that different models
can easily be related to each other.
2. Compare commonly used click models, discuss their advantages and limitations and provide a set of recommendations
on their usage.
3. Provide ready-to-use formulas and implementations of existing click models and detail general inference procedures to
facilitate the development of new ones.
4. Give an overview of existing datasets and tools for working
with click models and develop new ones.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be
honored. For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author(s). Copyright is held by the
owner/author(s).
SIGIR’15, August 09-13, 2015, Santiago, Chile.
ACM 978-1-4503-3621-5/15/08.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2766462.2767882.

5. Provide an overview of click model applications and directions for future development of click models.
Our target audience consists of researchers and developers in information retrieval who are interested in formally capturing user
interactions with search engine result pages, whether for ranking
purposes, to simulate user behavior in a lab setting, or simply to gain

1111

Coffee Break (30 minutes)
Block 2 (1.5 hours)

deeper insights in user behavior and interaction data. The tutorial
will be useful as an overview for anyone starting research work in
the area as well as for practitioners seeking concrete recipes.
The tutorial aims to provide a map of an increasingly rich landscape of click models. By the end of the half-day tutorial, attendees
should be familiar with the basic definitions and intuitions of what
we consider to be the core models, with inference tasks for these
models, and with uses of these models. While our presentation is
necessarily formal in places, we make a serious effort to relate the
models, the inference procedures and the applications back to the
core information retrieval task and to web search data by including a
fair number of examples. We hope that this supplies attendees who
are new to the area with effective means to start using click models
in their own research.

4. Live Demo: Building an Advanced Click Model (continued)
5. Guest talk: “Building a Click Model: From Idea to Implementation”
6. Click Model Applications and Future Directions In this part
we discuss different applications for modern click models in
different areas such as ranking, evaluation or user simulation.
We also discuss future directions for click models, the area
we believe to stay active in the coming years with more ideas
coming in and being integrated and re-integrated.
(a) Applications

3.

i. Inference of Document Relevance
ii. Click Model-based Metrics
iii. Simulating Users

DETAILED SCHEDULE

The advanced tutorial consists of two blocks of 1.5 hours. Each
block will incorporate three types of activity: (1) presentation of
the material, (2) live coding sessions, and (3) discussions at the end
of each 1.5 hours. Additionally we plan to bring an author of a
recent click model paper to give a short presentation and participate
in the discussion. For the coding sessions, we will provide code
examples and data samples. The participants will be able to either
follow the examples on the slides or perform them live along with
the presentation. During the discussion sessions at the end of each
1.5 hour block, we will offer the participants a number of quizzes
aimed to (self-)assess the comprehension of the presented material.
The schedule of the advanced tutorial is as follows.

(b) Future Directions
i. Rich User Feedback
ii. Heterogeneous Search
iii. Cross-Device and Cross-Session Search Tasks
7. Recap and Discussion

4.

Block 1 (1.5 hours)
1. Overview of Advanced Click Models

• Complete draft of the book [1]

Here we present main development directions of click models and discuss most prominent members of each class. We
discuss models’ assumptions, observed and hidden random
variables, models’ parameters and relations between parameters and random variables. This discussion is concluded
with a summary of differences and similarities between the
presented models. The following types of click models will
be covered in this part:

• Copy of the slides
• Code and data samples to follow live demos

Acknowledgements
This work was partially supported by the grant P2T1P2_152269 of
the Swiss National Science Foundation, the European Community’s
Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement nr 312827 (VOX-Pol), the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO) under project nrs 727.011.005, 612.001.116,
HOR-11-10, 640.006.013, 612.066.930, CI-14-25, SH-322-15, Amsterdam Data Science, the Dutch national program COMMIT, the
ESF Research Network Program ELIAS, the Elite Network Shifts
project funded by the Royal Dutch Academy of Sciences (KNAW),
the Netherlands eScience Center under project number 027.012.105,
the Yahoo! Faculty Research and Engagement Program, the Microsoft Research PhD program, and the HPC Fund.
All content represents the opinion of the authors which is not
necessarily shared or endorsed by their respective employers and/or
sponsors.

(a) Click models for aggregated search
(b) Beyond a single query session
(c) User diversity
(d) Eye tracking and mouse movements
(e) Nonlinear search engine result page examination
(f) Using editorial judgements
2. Live Demo: Building an Advanced Click Model
In this part, we use samples of publicly available datasets
and open-source software packages to guide the participants
through a process of extending a basic click model to incorporate some new ideas. In particular, we will use an open
source package maintained by Markov1 as well as samples
from interaction data shared by Yandex.2

REFERENCES
[1] A. Chuklin, I. Markov, and M. de Rijke. Click Models for Web
Search. Morgan & Claypool, 2015. To appear.

3. Recap and Discussion
1
2

TYPE OF SUPPORT MATERIALS TO BE
SUPPLIED TO ATTENDEES

https://github.com/markovi/PyClick
http://imat-relpred.yandex.ru/en/datasets

1112

