Revisiting the Foundations of IR: Timeless, Yet Timely
Paul B. Kantor
Rutgers University and CCICADA
96 Frelinghuysen Dr., Piscataway NJ 08854-8018 USA
732-322-8412 paul.kantor@rutgers.edu
They will include links to relevant software; links to publications
that will be discussed; and mechanisms for chat among the tutorial
participants, before, during and after the tutorial.

ABSTRACT
As we face an explosion of potential new applications for the
fundamental concepts and technologies of information retrieval,
ranging from ad ranking to social media, from collaborative
recommending to question answering systems, many researchers are
spending unnecessary time reinventing ideas and relationships that
are buried in the prehistory of information retrieval (which, for
many researchers, means anything published before they entered
graduate school).

Specific Topics will include:
1. The earliest “automated retrieval;
2. Vectors and Logarithms: their pragmatic origins;
3. Probabilistic approaches. A frequentist foundation;

Much of today’s received wisdom may be nothing more than the
fossilized residue of lively debates concerning such things as .
estimation of value and evaluation of systems. Returning to those
discussions may open the door to genuinely new insights.

4. The quest for a theoretical foundation;

On the other hand, of the ideas that surface as “new” in today’s
super-heated research environment have very firm roots in earlier
developments in fields as diverse as citation analysis, statistics, and
pattern recognition. The purpose of this tutorial is to survey those
roots, and their relation to the contemporary fruits on the tree of
information retrieval, and to separate, as much as is possible in an
era of increasing commercial secrecy about methods, the problems
to be solved, the algorithms for solving them, and the heuristics that
are the bread and butter of a working operation.

7. Binding approaches together.

5. Generative approaches;
6. Network approaches;

Certain materials that are very hard to find, including foundational
IBM technical reports by H.P. Luhn and I.J. Good will be scanned
and placed on a web site for the tutorial. Since this will not be a
public site, we will need some information on advance registration
to add participants to the site.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.0 General; H.3.3 Information Search and Retrieval

Among the important new topics whose foundations will be
explored are the use of social media in search and advertising, and
the growing management of personal image collections for search
and for commercial purposes.

General Terms: Algorithms, Measurement, Performance,
Theory

Keywords: Foundations of Information Retrieval

While some might think that an examination of the roots is of
merely historical interest, it has practical value as well. When you
know which earlier research has provided the origins for the things
that you are interested in, you can use that fact to trace its other
descendents, and often find rich and rewarding ideas in a literature
that you would not normally reach, because it was not considered
important by your instructors when you were learning about the
problems. In addition to pattern recognition and citation analysis,
the tutorial will also expose and review some of the relations to the
fields of statistics and operations research.

1

Overview and Rationale

The purpose of this tutorial is to survey those roots, and their
relation to the contemporary fruits on the tree of information
retrieval, and to separate, as much as is possible in an era of
increasing secrecy about methods, the problems to be solved, the
algorithms for solving them, and the heuristics that are the bread
and butter of a working operation.

Participants will become familiar with roots in Pattern Analysis,
Statistics, Information Science and other sources of key ideas that
reappear in the current development of Information Retrieval as it
applies to Search Engines, Social Media, and Collaborative
Systems. They will be able to separate problems from algorithms,
and algorithms from heuristics, in the application of these ideas to
their own research and/or development activities. Course materials
will be made available on a Web site two weeks prior to the tutorial.

2

Relevance to the Information Retrieval
Community

While some might think that an examination of the roots is of
merely historical interest, it has practical value as well. When you
know which earlier research has provided the origins for the things
that you are interested in, you can use that fact to trace its other
descendants, and often find rich and rewarding ideas in a literature
that you would not normally reach, because it was not considered
important by your instructors when you were learning about the
problems. In addition to pattern recognition and citation analysis,
the tutorial will also expose and review some of the relations to the
fields of statistics and operations research.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author. Copyright is held by the
owner/author(s).
SIGIR '15, August 09-13, 2015, Santiago, Chile
ACM 978-1-4503-3621-5/15/08. http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2766462.2767878

1125

3

F. Random numbers of random variables.
6. Network approaches:
A. Graph theory and IR
A. Origins in citation studies
(i) Impact Factor
(ii) Network instabilities
(iii) Co-citation analysis
B. Warren; Garfield; Small; Narin;
C. Kleinberg. Directed graphs. Hubs and authorities
D. Brin & Page: Page Rank
E. Ask.com and the “media war”
F. Networks social and other for information finding
(i) Folksonomies and Tagging
(ii) Association of persons

Course Objectives

Participants will become familiar with roots in Pattern Analysis,
Statistics, Information Science and other sources of key ideas that
reappear in the current development of Information Retrieval as it
applies to Search Engines, Social Media, and Collaborative
Systems. They will be able to separate problems from algorithms,
and algorithms from heuristics, in the application of these ideas to
their own research and/or development activities.

4

Outline of the Tutorial

1. The earliest “automated retrieval:
A. Origins in the American Chemical Society research
B. Kent experiments;
C. Sets and modifications
(i) Boole combinations
(ii) Quorum type rules rules;
D. Key word selection
E. Luhn; ranking texts
(i) the origins of tf
(ii) the origins of idf
F. Ranking and retrieval
2. Vectors and Logarithms: their pragmatic origins
A. Weighting the Importance of Features
B. Controlling for document size
(i) Salton and the ray space approach
(ii) Fox’s metrics
(iii) “Pivoting and Singhal
C. The unreasonable introduction of logarithms
D. Is there a “vector space of documents and queries”
(i) Queries as dual spaces
(ii) Non Euclidean metrics
E. Patterns in spaces
(i) Linear subspaces
(ii) Manifolds
(iii) Relative densities – relation to sensor
problems
3. Probabilistic approaches. A frequentist foundation
A. Maron and Kuhns
B. One user among many – the “system orientation?”
C. One document and one users – subjective probability
D. One user and a feature-based class of documents
(i) The “cluster hypothesis”
(ii) The “smoothness of relevance”
E. Research in Pattern Recognition
(i) Estimating densities empirically
4. The quest for a theoretical foundation:
A. I.J. Good and the weight of evidence. The “bin”
(i) odds of relevance
(ii) the relevance of log-odds
B. Robertson and Sparck-Jones
(i)
explaining” term weighting
(ii)
estimating parameters from data
C. Naïve but successful
(i) Is there a “deep reason”?
(ii) Robertson and “BM25”.
(iii) Hierarchical models
5. Generative approaches: Language models and topic modeling
A. A new layer of formalism
B. hidden relations to the older views
C. characterizing a literature, a topic or an interest
D. Conjugate distributions and hyperparameters
E. Mixtures of distributions

(iii) Privacy and social stability.
7. Binding approaches together:
A. No one method works
B. The kinds of synthesis
(i) Feature expansion
(ii) Rule combination
C. The scope of synthesis
(i) Global
(ii) User-dependent
(iii)
Task-dependent
D. Usage as a meta-feature
(i) Covert collection
(ii) Overt cooperation
8. Wild Speculations Can there be a theory of how information and
users interact? Brains without brain models?
A. Quantum formulations: information collapses the
users’ wave function
B. HOTT (HOmotopy Type Theory): user experience as a
path in info. space
C. An Appreciation of IJ Good.

5

Course Materials

Course materials will be made available on a Web site two weeks
prior to the tutorial. They will include links to relevant software;
links to publications that will be discussed; and mechanisms for
chat among the tutorial participants, before, during and after the
tutorial.

6

Some Relevant Monographs and Papers

[1] R.O. Duda, P.E. Hart, and D.G. Stork. Pattern classification.
2001.
[2] Geman, S. & Geman, D., 1984. Stochastic relaxation, Gibbs
distributions, and the Bayesian restoration of images. Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, IEEE Transactions on, (6),
pp.721–741.
[3] I.J. Good. Probability and the Weighing of Evidence. Griffin,
1950.
[4] I.J. Good. Rational decisions. Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society. Series B (Methodological), 14(1):107{114, 1952.
[5] I.J. Good. Maximum entropy for hypothesis formulation,
especially for multidimensional contingency tables. The
Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 34(3):911{934, 1963.
[6] IJ Good and RA Gaskins. Nonparametric roughness penalties
for probability densities. Biometrika, 58(2):255{277, 1971.

1126

[7] T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, and J.H. Friedman. The elements of
statistical learning: data mining, inference, and prediction.
Springer Verlag, 2009.

[12] Bishop, Christopher M. Pattern Recognition and Machine
Learning. 1st ed. 2006. Corr. 2nd printing, 2006, XX, 740 p.
304 illus. in color. Springer

[8] H.P. Luhn. A statistical approach to mechanized encoding and
searching of literary information. IBM Journal of research and
development, 1(4):309{317, 1957.

7

Selected Readings

Certain materials that are very hard to find, such as some papers by
H.P. Luhn and I.J. Good will be scanned and placed on a web site
for the tutorial. Since this will not be a public site, we will need
some information on advance registration to add participants to the
site.

[9] H.P. Luhn. A business intelligence system. IBM Journal of
Research and Development, 2(4):314{319, 1958.
[10] H.P. Luhn. The automatic creation of literature abstracts. IBM
Journal of research and development, 2(2):159{165, 1958.
[11] P. Massart. The Tight Constant in the Dvoretzky-KieferWolfowitz Inequality. Ann. Probab. Volume 18, Number 3
(1990), 1269-1283

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to John Prager and the Library at IBM for providing the
classic papers.

1127

