Graph Search and Beyond
SIGIR 2015 Workshop Summary
Omar Alonso

Marti A. Hearst

Jaap Kamps

Microsoft
Mountain View, CA
USA

UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA
USA

University of Amsterdam
Amsterdam
The Netherlands

ABSTRACT

in a massive multidimensional graph. This graph essentially
unifies both the searcher and the information resources that
played a fundamentally different role in traditional IR, and
offers major new ways to access relevant information. In services that rely on personalized information like social networks, the graph plays an even more important role, in other
words: you are the query.
Graph search affects both query formulation as well as
result exploration and discovery. On the one hand, it allows for incrementally expressing complex information needs
that triangulate information about multiple entities or entity
types, relations between those entities, with various filters
on geo-temporal constraints or the sources of information
used (or ignored), and taking into account the rich profile
and context information of the searcher (and his/her peers,
and peers of peers, etc). On the other hand, it allows for
more powerful ways to explore the results from various aspects and viewpoints, by slicing and dicing the information
using the graph structure, and using the same structure for
explaining why results are retrieved or recommended, and
by whom.
This new graph based information seeking approach introduces great opportunities, but also great challenges, both
technical ranging from data quality and data integration to
user interface design, as well as ethical challenges in terms of
privacy; transparency, bias and control; and avoiding the socalled filter bubbles. Graph search is already available today
in many flavors with different levels of interactivity. Social
network-based services like Facebook and LinkedIn provide
flexibility to search their personal network form many diverse angles. Web search engines like Google and Bing rely
more on using graphs to show related content as a mechanism to include other possible contexts for a given query.
Clearly, it is not limited to web, and can be applied to
other highly structured data. Just to give an example, the
hansards or parliamentary proceedings are fully public data
with a clear graph structure linking every speech to the respective speaker, their role in parliament and their political
party. Graph search allows to explore politics from the viewpoint of individual members of parliament or government.
At a high level, graph search seems limited to familiar
entity types (e.g., Facebook entities) and templates. How
far can this scale? Will this work on truly open domains?
There is a huge potential to use the graph to go beyond recommendations for new friends and contacts or semantically
related content. Unlocking the potential of richer knowledge
sources for new search strategies requires us to think outside

Modern Web data is highly structured in terms of entities
and relations from large knowledge resources, geo-temporal
references and social network structure, resulting in a massive multidimensional graph. This graph essentially unifies both the searcher and the information resources that
played a fundamentally different role in traditional IR, and
“Graph Search” offers major new ways to access relevant
information. Graph search affects both query formulation
(complex queries about entities and relations building on
the searcher’s context) as well as result exploration and discovery (slicing and dicing the information using the graph
structure) in a completely personalized way. This new graph
based approach introduces great opportunities, but also great
challenges, in terms of data quality and data integration,
user interface design, and privacy.
We view the notion of “graph search” as searching information from your personal point of view (you are the
query) over a highly structured and curated information
space. This goes beyond the traditional two-term queries
and ten blue links results that users are familiar with, requiring a highly interactive session covering both query formulation and result exploration. The workshop attracted
a range of researchers working on this and related topics,
and made concrete progress working together on one of the
greatest challenges in the years to come.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.3.3 [Information
Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search and Retrieval—
Query formulation, Search process, Selection process
Keywords: Graph search; Semantic search; Personalization; Exploration; Query suggest

1.

INTRODUCTION

Information on the Web is increasingly structured in terms
of entities and relations from large knowledge resources, geotemporal references and social network structure, resulting

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be
honored. For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author(s). Copyright is held by the
owner/author(s).
SIGIR’15, August 09–13, 2015, Santiago, Chile.
ACM 978-1-4503-3621-5/15/08.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2766462.2767855.

1145

the box, by combining different insights from IR, semantic
search, data integration, query expansion and user interfaces
to name a few.

2.

the wild testing, such as longer queries, multiple filters, longer dwell-time, more active engagement, more
structured-query templates? Can we use are standard experimental evaluation methods from HCI and
UI/UX design?

MANY OPEN RESEARCH QUESTIONS

Privacy Access to personal data is fraught ethical and privacy concerns, is there is similarly structured public
data for scientific research? As an extreme form of
personalization, how to avoid the uncanny cave, filter
bubbles and echo chambers? How ethical is it to privilege a particular query refinement suggestion over the
many other possible candidates?

We view the notion of “graph search” as searching information from your personal point of view (you are the
query) over a highly structured and curated information
space. This goes beyond the traditional two-term queries
and ten blue links results that users are familiar with, requiring a highly interactive session covering both query formulation and result exploration.
This raises many open questions:

3.

IR Theory What happens if search gets personal? Does
this break the classic dichotomy between users and
documents, as users are nodes in the social network
data themselves? What is the consequence of ultimate
personalization, as the local graph differs for all users?
As the local graph structure is key, does this obviate
the need for large central indexes? Do these types of
requests fit in the classic paradigm (e.g., Broder’s taxonomy)? How does this shift the balance between the
control of the searcher and the ranker over the result
set?
Data Integration Building a knowledge graph requires massive data integration at many levels: are there tradeoffs in simplicity and level of detail (such as the classic
knowledge representation trade-off)? What levels of
granularity and comprehensiveness are needed for effective deployment? What quality is needed: is any
noise acceptable? How to deal with near duplicate detection, conflation, or entity disambiguation?
Use Cases and Applications Rather than a universal solution, graph search is particularly useful for specific
types of information needs and queries. What are
the data and tasks that make graph search works?
What kind of scenarios that would benefit from a graph
model? In what context can switching perspectives by
showing results from the vista of other persons useful?
Query formulation How to move from singular queries to
highly interactive sessions with multiple variant queries?
What new tools are needed to help a searcher construct
the appropriate graph search query using refinements
or filters to better articulate their needs, or explore further aspects? How can we augment query autocompletion to actively prompt user to interactively construct
longer queries exploring different aspects?
Result Exploration There is a radical shift towards the
control of the searcher—small changes in the query can
lead to radically different result sets—how can we support active exploration of slices of the data to explore
further aspects? Unlike traditional facetted search options, the result space is highly dynamic, how can we
provide adaptive exploration options tailored to the
context and searcher, at every stage of the process?

CONCLUSIONS

The workshop brought together researchers from a range
of areas in information access, who worked together on searching information from your personal point of view over a
highly structured and curated information space. One of
the main lines of discussion was the considerable industrial
activity around social graphs. The most famous example is
Facebook Graph Search, a feature that allows users to perform more sophisticated searches on their social network [1].
Bing has been integrating Facebook into their web search results for the last couple of years. Similarly, Google has been
annotating search results with Google+ profiles. And all the
rest of the search industry is moving in the same direction.
There are also crucial links with work on searching structured data, and work on the appropriate query languages,
in particular as part of semantic search. These branches of
research in particular focus on complex querying of structured text or data, whereas the graph search addresses also,
and perhaps primarily, the process of constructing series of
complex queries interactively. This is directly related to exploratory search and sense making. The graph structure
provides natural facets for exploring the data, from a local point of view, allowing for a more dynamic structure
than traditional faceted search using rigid, global, hierarchical structure. This challenges our understanding of search
user interfaces design and evaluation, with search results
moving from the found links, to the HIT page as snippets,
and now to query suggestion as previews of possible query
extensions.
Graph Search has fundamental consequences for information access and offers tremendous opportunities for building
new systems and tools that allow users to explore information from many different angles, shifting control back to the
user. This is a radical departure from current systems where
the machine learning dominate the interaction: the entire information space is determined by the user, and the user is
in the driver’s seat when expressing her needs and exploring
the space of options interactive.
Acknowledgments This research is funded in part by the
Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (ExPoSe
project, NWO CI # 314.99.108; DiLiPaD project, NWO
Digging into Data # 600.006.014).

References
[1] N. V. Spirin, J. He, M. Develin, K. G. Karahalios, and
M. Boucher. People search within an online social network: Large scale analysis of facebook graph search
query logs. In CIKM’14, pages 1009–1018. ACM, 2014.
URL http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2661829.2661967.

Evaluation How do we know the system is any good? How
to evaluate the overall process, given its personalized
and interactive nature? Can we rely on the direct
evaluation of query suggestions and query recommendations? Are there suitable behavioral criteria for in

1146

