SIGIR 2015 Workshop on Temporal, Social and
Spatially-aware Information Access (#TAIA2015)
Klaus Berberich

James Caverlee

Max Planck Institute for
Informatics
Saarbruecken, Germany

Department of Computer
Science and Engineering
Texas A&M University
College Station, USA

kberberi@mpi-inf.mpg.de

caverlee@cse.tamu.edu
Claudia Hauff
Vanessa Murdock

Miles Efron
Graduate School of Library
and Information Science
University of Illinois
Champaign, USA

Web Information Systems
Delft University of Technology
Delft, the Netherlands

c.hauff@tudelft.nl

mefron@illinois.edu
Milad Shokouhi

vanmur@microsoft.com

Bart Thomee

Microsoft Research
Cambridge, UK

Yahoo! Labs
San Francisco, USA

bthomee@yahooinc.com

milads@microsoft.com
1.

Microsoft Corporation
Redmond, USA

OVERVIEW

We aim to bring together practitioners and researchers to
discuss their recent breakthroughs and the challenges with
addressing spatial and temporal information access, both
from the algorithmic and the architectural perspectives.

Spatial and temporal context are tightly coupled. For example, users may visit a place during specific times of the
day or on certain days of the week. Some places have special
relevance during a specific time of the year, or only exist for
a limited window of time. Understanding the spatial and
temporal context of a user is often necessary to understand
their information need. Understanding the user’s spatial
and temporal context is especially important on a mobile
device where the space is limited, and the user expectation
far exceeds the ability of the technology to satisfy him.
Users provide an unprecedented volume of detailed and
continuously updated information about where they are,
what they are doing, who they are with, and what they are
thinking and feeling about their current activities. The provision of this stream creates an informal contract between
the user and the information access application that is expected to provide results that are contextually relevant.
In this workshop, we build on the previous three successful editions [1, 2, 3], and explore spatial and temporal
context in dynamic geotagged collections such as Wikipedia,
traditional news sources, as well as social media sites such
as Twitter, Foursquare, Facebook and Flickr. We also investigate the geo-temporal dynamics of user engagements with
apps and search engines on mobile devices and cross-device.

Website:
http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/people/milads/
taia2015.aspx

2.

SCOPE

The workshop relates to all aspects of geographical and
time-sensitive information access. TAIA2015 has a special
focus on events, to include event detection, recommendation,
and characterization. Research questions include:
• How can we detect and profile past & future events
across social media channels and traditional media?
• How can we best leverage our understanding of a user’s
location and time context to improve the ranking of
places and content?
• How can we detect event-centric queries and leverage
temporal and spatial annotations in document to better serve them?
• How can we employ user generated content to describe
places or paths according to their beauty, engagement,
etc.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author. Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’15, August 09 - 13, 2015, Santiago, Chile.
c 2015 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3621-5/15/08 ...$15.00.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2766462.2767860.

• Can we construct a profile of places of interest of users
based on their social media streams?
• How can we profile small-scale events which are
sparsely covered in social media?

1149

• How can we model the footprint of a business from
users’ social tagging behavior?

• Understanding Web dynamics, including trends and
other temporal analysis on web and social graphs.

• How can we model the impact on a business based on
users’ online behavior?

• Local search and recommendation.

3.

• How to mine geo-temporal patterns of app usage on
mobile devices?

FORMAT

The workshop will include two keynotes, a series of talks (2030 minutes each) from accepted papers as well as a breakout
session and discussions to identify research challenges and
to foster understanding between the different communities.
The two keynotes, given by Barbara Poblete (University of
Chile) and Omar Alonso (Microsoft) provide a mix of academic and industrial perspectives on the workshop theme.

• How to perform geo-temporal analyses of cross-device
search?
In addition, TAIA2015 welcomes contributions on the following issues that complement current technologies in spatial and temporal information:
• Publicly available dynamic collections (e.g., Wikipedia
edits, Wikipedia page requests, Twitter, and news
streams).

4.

REFERENCES

[1] F. Diaz, S. Dumais, M. Efron, K. Radinsky,
M. de Rijke, and M. Shokouhi. SIGIR 2013 Workshop
on Time Aware Information Access (# TAIA2013). In
Proceedings of the 36th international ACM SIGIR
conference on Research & Development in Information
Retrieval, SIGIR ’13, pages 1137–1137, 2013.
[2] F. Diaz, S. Dumais, K. Radinsky, M. de Rijke, and
M. Shokouhi. #TAIA2012. SIGIR Forum,
46(2):102–106, 2012.
[3] F. Diaz, C. Hauff, V. Murdock, M. de Rijke, and
M. Shokouhi. SIGIR 2014 Workshop on Temporal,
Social and Spatially-Aware Information Access
(#TAIA2014). In Proceedings of the 37th international
ACM SIGIR conference on Research & Development in
Information Retrieval, SIGIR ’14, pages 1298–1298,
2014.

• Evaluation methodologies for geo-constrained and
time-sensitive tasks.
• Timeline creation and summarization.
• Spatial modeling of social media and Web content.
• Spatial and temporal intent classification of queries.
• Spatial and temporal natural language processing
tasks and techniques.
• Spatial and time-sensitive ranking including effective
ranking for spatiotemporal context-sensitive queries,
optimizing for both freshness and relevance, evaluating
the results for context sensitive queries, etc.
• Temporal changes in document contents.

1150

