Web Question Answering: Beyond Factoids
SIGIR 2015 Workshop
Eugene Agichtein

David Carmel

Charles L. A. Clarke

Emory University & Yahoo
Labs, Haifa, Israel

Yahoo labs, Haifa, Israel

University of Waterloo,
Canada

Google inc. Mountain View,
CA

Yahoo labs, Haifa, Israel

david.carmel@ymail.com
eugene@mathcs.emory.edu
Praveen Paritosh
Dan Pelleg,
pkp@google.com

pellegd@acm.org

Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.3.3 [Information Search
and Retrieval]: Retrieval models
General Terms: Algorithms
Keywords: Web Question Answering

1.

OVERVIEW

Automatic question answering is a central topic in information retrieval. Web search engines have made great
progress at answering factoid queries, such as “how many
people live in Australia?”. These can provide a succinct answer, up to a few words in length, and sometimes offer additional information such as related facts or entities. However, for deeper questions which could benefit from a longer
response (e.g., “history of Australia”), current search engine
resort to returning a link to a detailed web document. Alternatively, such a question might be posted on a Community
Question Answering (CQA) site (“Visiting Australia in May,
what should I see?”), hoping to get a human authored and
detailed response.
In this workshop we aim to explore the boundaries of Web
question answering to better understand the spectrum of approaches and possible responses that are more detailed than
a short fact, yet are more useful than a full document result. Is it possible to automatically answer diverse questions
ranging from advice on fixing a broken sink to requests for
opinions on the best basketball player of all time. In addition, questions submitted on the Web can be either short
and ambiguous (such as Web queries to a search engine),
or long and detailed (such as CQA questions). This workshop is particularly timely for two additional reasons: (1)
there still exist many disagreements regarding the goals and
nature of Web question answering services, mostly relating
to the questions of “question intent” (what kind of queries
benefit from question answering compared to other methods); and (2) leading search engines are eager to provide

claclark@uwaterloo.ca
Idan Szpektor
Yahoo labs, Haifa, Israel

idan@yahoo-inc.com

question answering services, especially for mobile devices.
These issues make the WebQA task more challenging than
traditional QA, and the most effective approaches remain
an open question.
We plan to bring together researchers from diverse areas working on this problem, including those from NLP, IR,
social media and recommender systems communities. As
compared to the main SIGIR conference, out goal is to conduct a more focused and open discussion, encouraging the
presentation of work in progress and late breaking initial
results in Web Question Answering. Both academic and industrial participation will be solicited, including keynotes
and invited speakers.
We encourage submissions describing ongoing research,
late breaking, preliminary results, and position papers on
the following topics:
• Social and User generated question analysis
• Identifying Question intent in Web queries
• Answer aggregation from various resources
• Answer summarization from various resources Using
Collaboratively Generated Content for QA
• Inferring answers for Web questions using knowledge
bases or graphs
• Answering opinion questions, including sentiment analysis
• Answering complex, multi-sentence questions
• Evaluation of question answering systems (e.g., via
crowd sourcing)
This workshop coincides with and complements the LiveQA
track at TREC 2015 ( www.trecliveqa.org ). LiveQA is a revival of the TREC Question Answering track, organized by
some of the workshop chairs. The track provides a challenge
and data for answering “real user questions”, posted to the
Yahoo Answers site. The LiveQA challenge evaluation is
to be held shortly after the workshop, which would provide
both the active and potential participants a way to discuss
ideas and approaches.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be
honored. For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author(s). Copyright is held by the
owner/author(s).
SIGIR’15, August 09-13, 2015, Santiago, Chile.
ACM 978-1-4503-3621-5/15/08.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2766462.2767861 .

1143

