Privacy-Preserving IR 2015: When Information Retrieval
Meets Privacy and Security
Hui Yang

Ian Soboroff

Georgetown University, USA

NIST, USA

ian.soboroff@nist.gov

huiyang@cs.georgetown.edu

ABSTRACT

discover as much information as possible about the victim,
either through direct observation of posted information or
by inferring knowledge using simple inference logic.
Information retrieval and information privacy/security are
two fast-growing computer science disciplines. Information
retrieval provides a set of information seeking, organization,
analysis, and decision-making techniques. Information privacy/security defends information from unauthorized or malicious use, disclosure, modification, attack, and destruction.
The two disciplines often appear as two areas with opposite
goals: one is to seek information from large amounts of materials, the other is to protect (sensitive) information from
being found out. On the other hand, there are many synergies and connections between these two disciplines. For
example, information retrieval researchers or practitioners
often need to consider privacy or security issues in designing
solutions of information processing and management, while
researchers in information privacy and security often utilize
information retrieval techniques when they build the adversary models to simulate how the adversary can actively seek
sensitive information. However, there have been very limited efforts to connect the two important disciplines.
In addition, due to lack of mature techniques in privacypreserving information retrieval, concerns about information
privacy and security have become serious obstacles that prevent valuable user data to be used in IR research such as
studies about query logs, social media, tweets, session analysis, and medical record retrieval. For example, the recent
TREC Medical Record Track halted over concerns about
privacy in nominally de-identified data, and the TREC Microblog Track does not directly distribute tweets in order to
support the right of Twitter users to make private or delete
their tweets and accounts. The situation needs to be improved in a timely manner. All these motive us to propose
this “privacy-preserving IR” workshop in SIGIR.
Co-located with SIGIR 2014, the first privacy-preserving
IR workshop (PIR 2014) [3] received active participation.
Most workshop attendees agreed that we need to continue
to collaborate on this topic, and to seek both general and
specific solutions to the privacy and security issues in various
IR tasks. This year, we continue the efforts with a set of new
focuses.

Information retrieval (IR) and information privacy/security
are two fast-growing computer science disciplines. There
are many synergies and connections between these two disciplines. However, there have been very limited efforts to
connect the two important disciplines. On the other hand,
due to lack of mature techniques in privacy-preserving IR,
concerns about information privacy and security have become serious obstacles that prevent valuable user data to be
used in IR research such as studies on query logs, social media, tweets, and medical record retrieval. We propose this
privacy-preserving IR workshop to connect the two disciplines of information retrieval and information privacy and
security. We look forward to spurring research that aims to
bring together the research fields of IR and privacy/security.
Last year, the first privacy-preserving IR workshop focused
on mitigating privacy threats in information retrieval by
novel algorithms and tools that enable web users to better
understand associated privacy risks.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3 [Information Systems ]: Information Storage and Retrieval

Keywords
Privacy-Preserving Information Retrieval

1.

MOTIVATION

With the emergence of online social networks and the
growing popularity of digital communication, more and more
information about individuals is becoming available on the
Internet. While much of this information is not sensitive, it
is not uncommon for users to publish sensitive information
online, especially on social networking sites. The availability
of this publicly accessible and potentially sensitive data can
lead to abuse and expose users to stalking and identity theft.
An adversary can digitally “stalk” a victim (a Web user) and

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be
honored. For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author(s). Copyright is held by the
owner/author(s).
SIGIR’15, August 09-13, 2015, Santiago, Chile.
ACM 978-1-4503-3621-5/15/08.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2766462.2767857.

2.

THEME AND PURPOSE

User privacy is at risk whenever owners of publicly available network resources can be traced and recorded, and
their user activities can be mined and inferred. The digital ecosystem involves not only such threats to personal

1157

privacy but also promising cures. For example, informationtheoretic protocols may decompose each user’s query into
several sub-queries, ensuring they include no information
about the user’s intent.
Privacy and security has been discussed in a few recent IR
conferences and workshops. The SIGIR 2012 “Community
IR Evaluation using Private Data Collections” workshop discussed issues how private data such as medical records can
be shared for open IR evaluations. The CIKM 2013 “Channeling the Deluge: Research Challenges for Big Data and
Information Systems” Panel Session also briefly addresses
the privacy issue in information systems. There are also
privacy- and security-related workshops that less related to
IR but more related to data mining, artificial intelligent, and
machine learning. For instance, Computer and Communication Security (CCS) 2013 workshop on “Artificial Intelligence and Security”. However, their focus is not mainly for
IR and is very different from the proposed workshop. As far
as we know, there have been very limited efforts to connect
the two important disciplines of information retrieval and
information privacy and security.
This workshop aims to spurring research that aims to
bring together the research fields of IR and privacy/security,
and mitigate privacy threats in information retrieval by constructing novel algorithms and tools that enable web users
to better understand associated privacy risks. We believe
this workshop in SIGIR can provide valuable opportunities
to explore the connection between information retrieval and
information privacy and security.

2.1

vices and recommender systems interact with Location
Obfuscation techniques and other Privacy-Enhancing
Technologies.

3.

KEYNOTES

Speaker: Dr. Li Xiong, Emory University.
Title: Making Private User Data Accessible for Information Retrieval Research: Data Sharing with Differential
Privacy
Abstract: Almost a decade has passed since the infamous AOL data leak. Up till today, data privacy concerns
continue to prohibit valuable user data such as query logs
and web browsing sessions to be shared and used for Information Retrieval (IR) research. As a result, lack of large
scale datasets is still one of the major barriers facing academic IR researchers. This talk will give an overview of the
recent developments in building and sharing statistical and
synthetic datasets based on private data with the rigorous
differential privacy guarantee. Then we will focus on techniques we have developed for sharing sequential data under
differential privacy, addressing challenges such as high dimensionality and high correlations, which are also common
characteristics in user behavior data. Empirical studies using real-world web browsing data will demonstrate the feasibility as well as challenges of applying differential privacy
on user behavior data for IR research.

4.

ACTIVITIES AND SCHEDULE

9:00–9:15am Welcome A brief welcome which illustrates the goal of this workshop and the schedule for the
day. All participants introduce themselves, their research
focus, and the specific interest in the topic of the workshop.
9:15–10:30am Keynote Talks
10:30–12:30pm Morning Presentations We have a
morning presentation session for high quality papers that
are accepted by the workshop.
12:30–1:30pm Lunch Break Participates have their
lunch, can discuss about the morning talks on their own.
1:30–4:00pm Group Discussion There will be breakout groups on different themes to have further discussion in
this section.
4:00–5:00pm Bring it All Together At the end of
the day, we will get everyone together to discuss about the
invited talks and posters.
5:00–5:15pm Conclusion The organizers will summarize the discussions and conclude the day.

List of Questions

The workshop addresses several important topics that connect information retrieval, information privacy and security:
• Protecting User Privacy in Search, Recommendation
and Beyond [1]: much damage can be caused as users
can be identified in AOL query log data and Neflix
log data, it is important to develop effective and efficient solutions to protect users’ privacy in information
retrieval applications.
• Dataset Distribution and Evaluation: How does privacy affect IR test dataset distribution and evaluation?
For instance, web query logs and medical records could
not be shared without privacy concerns to the public
or the researchers. How to anonymize the datasets
and make sure that they can be shared with a certain
degree of privacy guarantee while at the same time
preserves the utility of the data?
• Information Exposure Detection : new information retrieval and natural language processing technologies
are needed to quickly identify components and/or attributes of a user’s online public profile that may reduce the user’s privacy, and warn one’s vulnerability
on the Web.
• Novel Information Retrieval Techniques for Information Privacy/Security Application: new information
retrieval, evaluation, or machine learning techniques
need to be designed that fit the practice of applications in information privacy and security.
• Private Information Retrieval Techniques for Enabling
Location Privacy in Location-Based Services [2]: data
about a user’s location and historical movements can
potentially be gathered by a third party who takes
away the information without the awareness of the service providers and the users, how location-based ser-

5.

WEBSITE

Our website is located at privacypreservingir.org.

References
[1] W. Jiang, L. Si, and J. Li. Protecting source privacy in federated search. In W. Kraaij, A. P. de Vries, C. L. A. Clarke,
N. Fuhr, and N. Kando, editors, SIGIR, pages 761–762. ACM,
2007.
[2] A. Khoshgozaran and C. Shahabi. Privacy in location-based
applications. chapter Private Information Retrieval Techniques for Enabling Location Privacy in Location-Based Services, pages 59–83. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2009.
[3] L. Si and H. Yang. Pir 2014 the first international workshop
on privacy-preserving ir: When information retrieval meets
privacy and security. SIGIR Forum, 48(2):83–88, Dec. 2014.

1158

