NeuroIR 2015 – Neuro-Physiological Methods in IR
Research

Jacek Gwizdka

Joemon Jose

sigir2015@gwizdka.com

Joemon.Jose@glasgow.ac.uk

School of Information
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
University of Glasgow
TX, USA
UK

ABSTRACT

Javed Mostafa

Info. Science & BRIC
UNC at Chapel Hill
NC, USA
jm@unc.edu

Max L. Wilson

School of Computer Science
University of Nottingham
UK
max.wilson@nottingham.ac.uk

behavioral data and account for physiological and neurological
responses to information as stimuli. This early work by
information retrieval researchers resulted in a number of recent
publications that appeared at SIGIR, ECIR, and related
conferences.
Selected
recent
publications
include:
[2,4,5,6,7,8,9,11,12,13,14,15].

This Tutorial+Workshop will discuss opportunities and challenges
involved in using neuro-physiological tools/techniques (such as
fMRI, fNIRS, EEG, eye-tracking, GSR, HR, and facial
expressions) and theories in information retrieval. The hybrid
format will engage researchers and students at different levels of
expertise, from those who are active in this area to those who are
interested and want to learn more. The workshop will combine
presentations, discussions and tutorial elements and consist of
four segments (tutorial, completed research, work-in-progress,
closing panel).

However, the IR community is still widely unaware of these new
methods. We propose the workshop to discuss and exchange
experiences among researchers; build a community; plan future
work; make others aware of potential usefulness of neurophysiological methods and their applicability to their research;
enable others to read and assess papers that employ such methods.

General Terms

2. THEME AND PURPOSE

Neuroscience, Experimentation, Measurement.

The workshop will have three main themes: 1) cases and problems
in information retrieval that are particularly amenable to analysis
based on neuro-physiological methods (e.g., relevance judgment
studies), 2) comparative analysis of neuro-physiological tools and
techniques and their applications in information retrieval research
(e.g., fMRI versus EEG), and finally, 3) evaluation and statistical
analysis methods for incorporating neuro-physiological methods
in an IR research study.

Keywords

H. Information Systems. H.3 INFORMATION STORAGE AND
RETRIEVAL. H.3.3 Information Search and Retrieval.
Subjects: Query formulation; Search process; Retrieval models

Author Keywords

fMRI, fNIRS, eye-tracking, EEG, GSR, HR.

1. MOTIVATION

For the theme 1 above, we will invite presentations and posters on
current IR projects that are utilizing neuro-physiological methods.
For theme 2, we will incorporate presentations and
demonstrations of neuro-physiological techniques in the
workshop. We will invite researchers with strong experience in
utilizing portable tools such as eye-trackers and EEGs,
encouraging them to bring with them some of these tools. We
will also encourage researchers with recent experiences in
applying fMRI and fNIRS and other methods based on large
imaging instruments to participate. Finally, for theme 3, a certain
number of presentations and posters will be sought that place
emphasis on metrics, evaluation methods, and statistical
techniques associated with neuro-physiological information
retrieval data.

The progress made in neuroscience in the last two decades allows
one to expect that neuroscience (and related fields) will contribute
to other disciplines. It has already happened in several social
science disciplines, such as economics and marketing –
neuroeconomics and neuromarketing have been established over a
decade ago. The results from collaboration between behavioral
economists and neuroscientists have supported advances in
understanding of decision-making and human behavior [1]. More
recently, information systems researchers started a new sub-field
NeuroIS (Neuro Information Systems – [3]; NeuroIS.org, 2009).
Information systems research studies the development and use of
information and communication technologies in organizations and
society. NeuroIS is “a subfield of information systems literature
that relies on neuroscience and neurophysiological theories and
tools to better understand the development, use, and impact of
information technologies (IT)” [10].

3. FORMAT AND PLANNED ACTIVITIES

The workshop schedule will combine presentations, discussions
and tutorial elements and consist of four segments.

Application of neuro-physiological methods for studying
browsing tasks, information selection, and relevance judgment
have emerged as critical areas of active research. The broad
intersecting theme, among IR researchers and those with strong
applied neuroscience background, is development of more robust
models for information search – models which go beyond

1) Tutorial - will offer guidance on how to start working with
neuro-physiological tools in the context of IR. We will introduce
and compare several tools, such as EEG, eye-tracking and fMRI,
and will discuss best practices and useful tips, which will be
helpful to all, not just those new to the area.
2) Completed research - experienced participants will present
findings and lessons learned from their own work and will
consider how neuro-cognitive and physiological tools, such as
fMRI, fNIRS, eye-tracking, EEG, GSR, and analysis of facial
expressions could further contribute to IR research questions.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned
by others than ACM must be honored. For all other uses, contact the
Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
SIGIR '15, August 09-13, 2015, Santiago, Chile
ACM 978-1-4503-3621-5/15/08.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2766462.2767856

1151

Javed Mostafa. Javed is the Director of the Carolina Health
Informatics Program (chip.unc.edu) and the Director of the
Laboratory of Applied Informatics Research (lair.unc.edu). His
research concentrates on information retrieval problems,
particularly related to search and user-system interactions in largescale document/data repositories. He also serves as the Deputy
Director of the Biomedical Informatics Core at the NC
Translational & Clinical Sciences Institute (tracs.unc.edu) and has
current research engagements in biomedical data mining, analysis,
visualization, user interface design, and multi-modal humancomputer interaction. Javed served as an associate editor for the
ACM Transactions on Information Systems for eight years. He
currently serves on the editorial board of the Journal of the
Association for Information Science & Technology
(http://www.asis.org/jasist.html) and he also serves as an associate
editor of the ACM Transactions on Internet Technology
(http://toit.acm.org/). Javed is interested in investigating the
possible relationship between locations in the brain that specialize
in certain activities and information seeking tasks. A related
interest is information seeking evaluation methodologies that
employ a broad spectrum of biological / physiological methods.
Dr. Mostafa has significant experience in organizing research
workshops, sponsored by several organizations, including the
NSF (2 as PI), ACM DL (2005, 2006, and 2007), and SIGIR
(2004).

3) Work-in-progress - participants, and particularly those who are
starting out in this area, will present their planned/current work in
lightning talks; group discussions will provide feedback and
guidance.
4) Closing panel - will discuss future directions and collaborations
between workshop participants.
A workshop webpage https://sites.google.com/site/neuroir2015
will be maintained and added to http://www.neuroinfoscience.org
website maintained by Jacek Gwizdka.

4. PARTICIPANTS’ SELECTION

Selection of papers and posters will be conducted at two levels.
Members of the program committee will be assigned
responsibilities to conduct the first level review. At least two
reviewers will be assigned per paper and at least one member will
review each poster. A final review of all papers and posters will
be conducted by the four members of the organizing committee.
About 15 papers and 12 posters will be selected, and the
associated researchers will be invited to attend the workshop. We
anticipate a maximum of about 35 participants in this event, but
we do not intend to limit participation.

5. ORGANIZERS

Jacek Gwizdka is an Assistant Professor and Information
eXperience Lab co-director at School of Information at University
of Texas, Austin. He studies cognitive aspects of humaninformation interaction; his research is situated at the intersection
of interactive-information retrieval (IIR) and human-computer
interaction (HCI). His current projects include application of
cognitive psychology to the study of how people evaluate
information relevance and neuro-physiological methods to
implicit assessment of cognitive load. He also investigates effects
of search results presentation and cognitive abilities on
information search task performance. Dr. Gwizdka has been
affiliated with University of Toronto, Rutgers University and
University of Texas at Austin. He conducted research at industrial
labs (Xerox PARC, FXPAL, HP Labs). He serves in various roles
at international conference committees (e.g., CHIIR, IIiX,
ASIS&T, ACM SIGCHI and SIGIR) and has co-organized
successful workshops at several international conferences,
including: IIiX (SaL2014), SIGIR (UIIR2009), CSCW
(Email’2002). He is as an Associate Editor of Interacting with
Computers and serves on editorial board of Information
Processing & Management. More on Dr. Gwizdka’s research can
be found at: http://gwizdka.com

Max L. Wilson is an Assistant Professor in Human-Computer
Interaction and Information Retrieval (HCIR) at the University of
Nottingham. Max holds a PhD in Human-Computer Interaction
from the University of Southampton, and publishes widely in the
space between HCI and Information Retrieval, including a book
on Search User Interface Design with Morgan Claypool, and a
chapter for Ruthven and Kelly's Interactive IR textbook. As well
as being on conference committees (e.g. CHI 2010-2016,
IIiX2010-14) and being on the editorial boards for IP&M and
IJHCS, Max has organised several workshops, including the prior
EuroHCIR and Searching4Fun workshops. Max’s recent work
published at ACM CHI2014 and CHI2015 have been on the use
of fNIRS brain sensing for measuring mental workload in the prefrontal cortex.

6. PROGRAM COMMITTEE

 Ioannis Arapakis, Yahoo Research, Spain
 Vincent N. Carrasco, Laboratory of Applied Informatics
Research, SILS, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
USA
 Ashlee Edwards, SILS, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, USA
 Manuel Eugster, HIIT, Aalto University, Finland
 Roberto
González-Ibáñez,
Informatics
Engineering,
Universidad de Santiago, Chile
 O’Brien Heather, UBC, Canada
 Hideo Joho, Faculty of Library, Information and Media
Science, University of Tsukuba, Japan
 Yvonne Kammerer, Leibniz-Institut für Wissensmedien Knowledge Media Research Center, Germany
 Irene Lopatovska, Pratt Institute, USA
 Randall Minas, Information Technology Management Dept,
Shidler College of Business, University of Hawaii at Manoa,
USA
 Yashar Moshfeghi,
Computer Science, University of
Glasgow, UK
 Heather O'Brien, iSchool, University of British Columbia,
Canada

Joemon M. Jose is a Professor at the School of Computing
Science, University of Glasgow. He is a fellow of the BCS, IET
and a chartered information technology professional (CITP),
member of the ACM and IEEE. He has a well-established
reputation in research on multimedia information retrieval,
developing advanced retrieval models, studying the role of
emotion in search, personalization and adaptive retrieval. His
current research interests include: neurophysiological feedback
based systems for IR. He has published over 110 journal and
conference articles and leads a team of 6 PhD students and 3 postdoctoral researchers. He was a co-chair of the ICMR 2014, and
ECDL 2010 conferences, and had organized numerous
conferences and events including AIR 2008, SSMS 2007, AIR
2006, AMR 2005, IRiX 2005 & IRFEST 2005. He was a guest
editor for the Information Processing and Management on
Adaptive Retrieval and a keynote speaker for the RIAO 2010
conference.

1152






8. Moshfeghi, Y. and Jose, J.M. An effective implicit relevance
feedback technique using affective, physiological and
behavioural features. Proceedings of the 36th international
ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in
information retrieval, ACM (2013), 133–142.
9. Moshfeghi, Y., Pinto, L.R., Pollick, F.E., and Jose, J.M.
Understanding Relevance: An fMRI Study. In P. Serdyukov,
P. Braslavski, S.O. Kuznetsov, et al., eds., Advances in
Information Retrieval. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, 14–
25. BEST PAPER.
10. Riedl, R., Randolph, A., Brocke, J. vom, Léger, P.-M., and
Dimoka, A. The Potential of Neuroscience for HumanComputer Interaction Research. SIGHCI 2010 Proceedings,
(2010).
11.Arapakis, I., Athanasakos, K., and Jose, J.M. A comparison of
general vs personalised affective models for the prediction of
topical relevance. SIGIR'2010, ACM (2010), 371–378.
12.Arapakis, I., Moshfeghi, Y., Joho, H., Ren, R., Hannah, D., and
Jose, J.M. Enriching User Profiling with Affective Features
for the Improvement of a Multimodal Recommender System.
CIVR'2009, 29:1–29:8. BEST STUDENT PAPER.
13.Lopatovska, I. and Arapakis, I. Theories, methods and current
research on emotions in library and information science,
information retrieval and human-computer interaction. IP&M
47, 4 (2011), 575–592.
14. Maior, H., Pike, M., Sharples, S. and Wilson, M.L. (2015)
Examining the Reliability of Using fNIRS in Realistic HCI
Settings for Spatial and Verbal Tasks. In: Proc. CHI'15
(accepted).
15. Pike, M. F., Maior, H. A., Porcheron, M., Sharples, S. C., &
Wilson, M. L. (2014, April). Measuring the effect of think
aloud protocols on workload using fNIRS. In Proc. CHI’14
(pp. 3807-3816). ACM.

Luisa Pinto, Computer Science, University of Glasgow, UK
Frank Pollick, Psychology, University of Glasgow, UK
University of Glasgow, UK
Erin Solovey, College of Computing and Informatics,
Drexel, USA

7. RELATED WORKSHOPS AND PANEL

Two of the workshop organizers (Gwizdka & Mostafa) coorganized a very successful panel session at ASIST 2013 in
Montreal entitled “Panel Title: Applications of Neuroimaging in
Information Science: Challenges and Opportunities”.

8. REFERENCES

1. Camerer, C.F., Loewenstein, G., and Prelec, D.
Neuroeconomics:
Why
Economics
Needs
Brains.
Scandinavian Journal of Economics 106, 3 (2004), 555–579.
2. Cole, M.J., Gwizdka, J., Liu, C., Belkin, N.J., and Zhang, X.
Inferring user knowledge level from eye movement patterns.
Information Processing & Management 49, 5 (2013), 1075–
1091.
3. Dimoka, A., Pavlou, P.A., and Davis, F. NeuroIS: The
Potential of Cognitive Neuroscience for Information Systems
Research. INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH, (2010),
isre.1100.0284.
4. Eugster, M.J.A., Ruotsalo, T., Spapé, M.M., et al. Predicting
Term-relevance from Brain Signals. Proceedings of the 37th
International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research &#38;
Development in Information Retrieval, ACM (2014), 425–434.
5. Gwizdka, J. Looking for Information Relevance In the Brain.
Gmunden Retreat on NeuroIS 2013, (2013), 14. BEST
PAPER
6. Gwizdka, J. Characterizing Relevance with Eye-tracking
Measures. Proceedings of the 5th Information Interaction in
Context Symposium, ACM (2014), 58–67.
7. Gwizdka, J. News Stories Relevance Effects on Eyemovements. Proceedings of the Symposium on Eye Tracking
Research and Applications, ACM (2014), 283–286.

1153

