SPS’15 – 2015 International Workshop on Social
Personalization & Search
Christoph Trattner

Denis Parra

NTNU, Norway

PUC, Chile

dparra@ing.puc.cl

chritrat@idi.ntnu.no
Peter Brusilovsky

Leandro Marinho

University of Pittsburgh, USA

peterb@pitt.edu
Categories and Subject Descriptors

wise sense, support the common goal of users working on the
same search tasks, such as people planning a group trip.
We invite submissions that may include the following topics, but are not limited to:
• search and recommendations based on social links
• search and recommendations in collaborative tagging
systems
• group-level search personalization
• search and recommendations in blogs and microblogs
• approaches for social personalization in recommender
systems
• approaches on personalized social collaboration
• approaches on social linking
• methods for social search and navigation
• methods for social predictive models
• social methods for information visualization
• applications of the aforementioned topics to diverse
domains (education, smart cities, music, etc.)
• any other methods that exploit new forms of social
data for search and personalization
• applications of any of the above methods

H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information
Search and Retrieval—Information filtering

Keywords
social personalization; social search & navigation; recommender systems; user modeling

1.

OVERVIEW

For the Social Personalization & Search workshop1 , we
invite researchers working in the fields of Information Retrieval, Personalization, User Modeling, and Recommender
Systems where the social dimension plays a fundamental
role. The workshop is examining several approaches that
leverage the social side of the search process on two main
contexts: (a) using social data for improving search and
recommendations, and (b) search as a social process, collaborative IR (e.g., [1, 4, 3, 2]).
On the first context, we expect to attract contributions
that use the social dimension in different methods for personalization and search, such as data from online social networks, social tagging systems, online forums and communitybased Q&A. This topic is important because it involves
leveraging new sources of information that are specific to
social systems such as shared items and tags, user public
profiles, online and offline social connections, and logs of
user social activities in order to improve people’s information access in a wide variety of tasks and devices.
On the second context, the social dimension is emphasized
as collaboration, so we aim to discuss works that consider
information seeking as a collaborative activity. Here, researches can potentially use explicit social communication
information (such as online, offline chat) to boost the personalized search experience for each user, or in a community1

UFCG, Brasil

lbmarinho@dsc.ufcg.edu.br

The goal of this workshop is to share and discuss research that goes hopefully beyond classic personalization
techniques, trying to capitalize potentially useful information available in social data for paving the way to more efficient personalized information access technologies. In addition to personalization, we also consider social search and
navigation as topics that involve the importance of the social
dimension on filtering and information access.
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank
Alejandro Bellogı́n for his help with the organization of this
workshop.

2.
[1]

REFERENCES

A. Bellogı́n, I. Cantador, and P. Castells. A comparative
study of heterogeneous item recommendations in social
systems. Inf. Sci., 221:142–169, 2013.
[2] E. Lacic, D. Kowald, L. Eberhard, C. Trattner, D. Parra,
and L. B. Marinho. Utilizing online social network and
location-based data to recommend products and categories
in online marketplaces. In Mining, Modeling, and
Recommending’Things’ in Social Media, pages 96–115. 2015.
[3] D. Lee and P. Brusilovsky. Recommending talks at research
conferences using users’ social networks. IJCIS, 23(02), 2014.
[4] C. Trattner, D. Parra, L. Eberhard, and X. Wen. Who will
trade with whom?: Predicting buyer-seller interactions in
online trading platforms through social networks. In Proc. of
WWW’14, pages 387–388.

http://socialcomputing.ing.puc.cl/sps2015/

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the Owner/Author. Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
SIGIR ’15, August 09–13, 2015, Santiago, Chile.
ACM 978-1-4503-3621-5/15/08.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2766462.2767859 .

1155

