Towards a Game-Theoretic Framework
for Information Retrieval
ChengXiang Zhai
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
czhai@illinois.edu

Abstract
The task of information retrieval (IR) has traditionally been
defined as to rank a collection of documents in response to a
query. While this definition has enabled most research progress
in IR so far, it does not model accurately the actual retrieval task
in a real IR application, where users tend to be engaged in an
interactive process with multipe queries, and optimizing the
overall performance of an IR system on an entire search session
is far more important than its performance on an individual
query.
In this talk, I will present a new game-theoretic formulation of
the IR problem where the key idea is to model information
retrieval as a process of a search engine and a user playing a
cooperative game, with a shared goal of satisfying the user's
information need (or more generally helping the user complete a
task) while minimizing the user's effort and the resource
overhead on the retrieval system. Such a game-theoretic
framework offers several benefits. First, it naturally suggests
optimization of the overall utility of an interactive retrieval
system over a whole search session, thus breaking the limitation
of the traditional formulation that optimizes ranking of
documents for a single query. Second, it models the interactions
between users and a search engine, and thus can optimize the
collaboration of a search engine and its users, maximizing the
"combined intelligence" of a system and users. Finally, it can
serve as a unified framework for optimizing both interactive
information retrieval and active relevance judgment acquisition
through crowdsourcing. I will discuss how the new framework
can not only cover several emerging directions in current IR
research as special cases, but also open up many interesting new
research directions in IR.

BIO
ChengXiang Zhai is a Professor of Computer Science and Willett
Faculty Scholar at the University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign, where he is also affiliated with the Graduate School
of Library and Information Science, Institute for Genomic
Biology, and Department of Statistics. He received a Ph.D. in
Computer Science from Nanjing University in 1990, and a Ph.D.
in Language and Information Technologies from Carnegie
Mellon University in 2002. He worked at Clairvoyance Corp. as a
Research Scientist and a Senior Research Scientist from 1997 to
2000. His research interests include information retrieval, text
mining, natural language processing, machine learning,
biomedical and health informatics, and intelligent education
information systems. He has published over 200 research papers
in major conferences and journals. He is an Associate Editor for
Information Processing and Management and previously served
as an Associate Editor of ACM Transactions on Information
Systems, and on the editorial board of Information Retrieval
Journal. He is a conference program co-chair of ACM CIKM
2004, NAACL HLT 2007, ACM SIGIR 2009, ECIR 2014,
ICTIR 2015, and WWW 2015, and conference general co-chair
for ACM CIKM 2016. He is an ACM Distinguished Scientist
and a recipient of multiple awards, including the ACM SIGIR
2004 Best Paper Award, the ACM SIGIR 2014 Test of Time
Paper Award, Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellowship, IBM Faculty
Award, HP Innovation Research Program Award, Microsoft
Beyond Search Research Award, and the Presidential Early
Career Award for Scientists and Engineers (PECASE).

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Retrieval
models

General Terms
Algorithms

Keywords
interactive information retrieval; search engines; game theory;
retrieval models

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or
distributed for profit or commercial advantage, and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work
must be honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). Copyright is held
by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’15, August 09-13, 2015, Santiago, Chile.
ACM 978-1-4503-3621-5/15/08.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2766462.2767853

543

