Differences in Eye-tracking Measures Between Visits
and Revisits to Relevant and Irrelevant Web Pages
Jacek Gwizdka

Yinglong Zhang

School of Information
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX, USA
sigir2015@gwizdka.com

School of Information
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX, USA
yzhang@utexas.edu
Given the notion of multi-stage relevance judgment process, we aim
to investigate changes in cognitive processes as they are reflected in
differences in how documents are viewed and read. In the current
project we are looking for evidence of such differences in cognitive
processing in Web information search that leads to finding one or
more relevant documents. This type of investigation lends itself well
to the application of eye-tracking as a data collection method. Eyetracking helps to get insights into cognitive processes involved in
assessing document relevance. Prior work that used eye-tracking in
investigation of differences in user behavior between irrelevant and
relevant documents tended to use simple documents (e.g., individual
sentences or short paragraphs); work that used more realistic tasks
and more complex documents (e.g., web pages) did not document
visits and revisits, neither did it examine pupil dilation. Prior work
tended to look at differences in eye measurements between levels of
document relevance, but it did not examine differences at sequential
stages in the information search process. Our goal in this short paper
is to extend previous work by examining differences in eye-tracking
derived measures on Web search tasks conducted on English
Wikipedia on pages marked by users as relevant or irrelevant. We
examine fixation durations and saccade-related measures, but focus
mainly on pupil dilation. To investigate differences between stages
of the search process, we operationalize them in a simple way as
first visits and subsequent revisits to irrelevant and relevant pages.
We formulated the following hypotheses:

ABSTRACT
This short paper presents initial results from a project, in which
we investigated differences in how users view relevant and
irrelevant Web pages on their visits and revisits. The users’
viewing of Web pages was characterized by eye-tracking
measures, with a particular attention paid to changes in pupil size.
The data was collected in a lab-based experiment, in which users
(N=32) conducted assigned information search tasks on
Wikipedia. We performed non-parametric tests of significance as
well as classification. Our findings demonstrate differences in
eye-tracking measures on visits and revisits to relevant and
irrelevant pages and thus indicate a feasibility of predicting
perceived Web document relevance from eye-tracking data. In
particular, relative changes in pupil size differed significantly in
almost all conditions. Our work extends results from previous
studies to more realistic search scenarios and to Web page visits
and revisits.

General Terms
Experimentation, Human Factors, Measurement.

Keywords
H. Information Systems. H.3 INFORMATION STORAGE AND
RETRIEVAL. H.3.3 Information Search and Retrieval.
Subjects: Search process.

H1. Pupil dilation and (some other) eye-tracking measures will
differ between relevant and irrelevant pages.

Author Keywords
Web search; relevance judgment; eye-tracking.

H2. Pupil dilation and (some other) eye-tracking measures will
differ between first and subsequent visits to Web pages.

1. INTRODUCTION
Notwithstanding the large body of work on information relevance
and relevance judgments, we still do not fully understand the
process of how people judge relevance of documents. It is
generally agreed that relevance judgment process is dynamic and
multi-dimensional [3, 12], but we are only beginning to
understand how the various relevance aspects might be applied by
users in the process of assessing documents. A formal model of
aggregating relevance aspects was proposed [6], but only few
research projects attempted to deal with that process from the
cognitive perspective [9]. Though, there is also a more recent
work in which a cognitively-influenced two-stage model of
document assessment was proposed [23].

H3. Pupil dilation and (some other) eye-tracking measures will
differ between visits to relevant pages when a page relevance was
decided compared to other visits to the same relevant pages, when
the pages were not judged as relevant yet.
In the next section, we present related work to place our project in
context and to motivate our hypotheses.

2. RELATED WORK
One reason why improved understanding of relevance judgment
process from user’s perspective is useful, is to better model
differences between trained relevance judges and actual users. In
the already mentioned work [23], Yilmaz et al. proposed a twostage model of document assessment. The two stages are “1.
initial assessment” and “2. extract utility”. The authors used this
model to explain disparities between judges and users relevance
assessments. In addition to being motivated by the notion of
stages in document assessment, our work draws on the authors’
finding that effort plays an important role in user assessment of
document relevance and their argument for including effort in
modeling relevance judgment process. Other researchers also

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned
by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To
copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from
Permissions@acm.org
SIGIR '15, August 09 - 13, 2015, Santiago, Chile
© 2015 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3621-5/15/08…$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2766462.27677950.

811

equipped with Tobii T60 eye-tracker. The eye-tracking and
interaction data was collected using Attention Tool software [13],
while the task rotations and questionnaires were controlled by
YASFIIRE software [22]. Task rotations were assigned to
participants in a random order. In each task, participants read task
description, completed pre- and post- task questionnaires, and
searched Wikipedia. At the end of the session, they answered an
exit questionnaire. There were no time limits set for search tasks.
In this paper, our focus is on viewing behavior of Wikipedia
pages. During a visit to a Wikipedia page, in addition to reading
the page, a user could open a search task description on screen,
bookmark the page and enter notes, edit the previously entered
notes, and decide to complete the task by entering and editing the
final notes about the results of their search. According to the
instructions given to our participants, bookmarking a page
signified that the page was perceived by a participant as relevant
to the search task, thus the bookmarking events provided us with
binary relevance judgments. Users were also able to delete any
bookmark, if they decided that a page was not relevant any more.
The visits to Wikipedia pages (relevant and irrelevant) were
categorized into first visits and revisits. We further distinguished
these visits to relevant pages when relevance judgments were
made (these included first visits and revisits). We isolated time
periods when a user was viewing a Wikipedia page (that is not
reading task description nor entering notes) and considered each
of them separately in our data analysis. We call user’s activity
during these time periods a page viewing state and emphasize that
a visit to a Web page may contain one or more such states.
Extraction of isolated page viewing states serves a purpose of
separating cognitive activities related to document processing
from other activities, and, thus, could be considered as
contributing to eye-tracking data cleaning.

postulated for including effort in modeling interactive information
search; for example, using cost of search actions to explain some
aspects of search behavior [1], or using search effort to explain
search task success [2]. Furthermore, Villa and Halvey [21]
showed a relationship between mental effort and relevance levels
of judged documents. As we will explain later, pupil dilation,
which is typically provided by eye-trackers, is related to mental
effort.
Eye-tracking has received considerable attention as a data source
useful in information retrieval research. Much of the work has
concentrated on eye fixation patterns on ranked search results
pages [4,7,14,19]. While this work brought an improved
understanding of eye gaze on web pages in general, and on search
engine results pages, specifically, it did not address how people
view and read documents that differ in their degree of relevance to
the user’s information need. In other work, eye-tracking
techniques have been used in research on relevance judgments.
For example, Loboda et al. [16] focused at the word-level
relevance and showed a relationship between eye fixation
measures and the relevance of terminal words in sentences.
Research presented in [20] and [5] demonstrated that user’s eye
movement behaviors would shift between scanning, reading, or
deciding processes, and that reading and skimming behavior was
heavily influenced by relevance (especially by topicality of text).
In agreement with these findings, [8,10] reported that relevant and
irrelevant paragraphs and short documents, respectively, could be
discriminated based on gaze data and eye-movement patterns in
reading experiments. Although eye-tracking derived measures
were investigated in previous research, most of the above
mentioned studies focused on fixation duration, fixation counts,
and fixation locations; pupil dilation has been generally neglected.
Cognitive psychology research informs us that under constant
illumination pupil dilation is associated with mental effort and
attention [18] and thus, plausibly, it may be related to cognitive
processing of documents. Indeed, Gwizdka and Oliveira et al.
[10,17] demonstrated that changes in pupil size are related to
levels of relevance – pupil dilated for more relevant stimuli, both
for text and images. In light of this evidence, it seems reasonable
to incorporate pupilometry in interactive information retrieval
research. The use of pupilometry is additionally corroborated by
the relationship between pupil dilation and mental effort.

The perceived binary level of page relevance, page first visit,
revisit, and visit with relevance judgment were factors used in
data analysis. Table 1 shows eye-tracking derived variables.
Table 1. Eye-tracking measures
Variable

Description

Fixation duration
Saccade duration

Duration of an eye fixation, in milliseconds
Duration of a saccade, that is of a fast eye
movement between eye fixations, in milliseconds
Length of a saccade, in pixels
Angle of a saccade relative to the horizontal axis,
in degrees
The relative change in pupil diameter: A difference
between pupil size at a time t and the average pupil
size for a participant, normalized by that average

Saccade length
Saccade angle

In summary, eye-tracking is a feasible approach to examining
user’s implicit relevance judgments. With the sizable body of
prior work, there is still a need for more research conducted on
more realistic search task scenarios and documents (e.g., on the
live Web), and paying attention to sequential stages of search and
to a wider range of eye-tracking measures. That’s where we
position our current work.

Relative pupil
dilation

4. DATA ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
We first removed page viewing states with few eye fixation data
points by deleting states shorter than 6 seconds. This resulted in
removing less than 6% of data. All further analyses were
conducted after these short states were removed.

3. METHOD
We conducted a lab-based experiment of Web search on
Wikipedia. 32 native English speakers (15 females) with a
normal, to corrected-to-normal vision, attended individual
experiment sessions held in the Information eXperience (IX) lab
in the School of Information at University of Texas at Austin.
Each session was completed within 1.5 hours; participants
received $30 for their participation. Each participant was asked to
complete four search tasks that were designed to differ in
complexity (within-subject design). The searches were conducted
on Wikipedia using a commercial test search engine created by
Search Technologies Corp. We used the commercial search
engine, because Wikipedia does not provide full-text search.
Participants used a PC computer running Windows 7 that was

Level
1
2
n/a
n/a
3
4
5

Table 2. Counts of page viewing states
Page and visit types
first visit
Irrelevant page
revisit
first visit
Relevant page
revisit
first visit*
Relevant page*
revisit*
Rel. page visit with relevance judgment

Count
215
91
358
407
323
374

306
765
697
68

* shows counts after removing visits when relevance judgments were made, which
are contained in level 5

812

Our data did not satisfy analysis of variance assumptions,
therefore we performed non-parametric tests. We constructed a 5level factor variable (shown in Table 2 & 3) from visits to
irrelevant and relevant pages and different visit types (first visits,
revisits, and visits to relevant pages with relevance judgment).
The Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test conducted with this factor
showed significant differences for fixation duration (χ(4)2=24.05,
saccade
p<.001), pupil dilation (χ(4)2=891.33, p<<.0001),
duration
(χ(4)2=171.3, p<<.0001), and saccade length
(χ(4)2=41.15, p<.0001).

To further investigate how eye-tracking data reflects relevance
judgments, we employed classification. In the analysis, we
proposed two models to classify two different situations. The first
model was used to classify first visits to relevant pages and visits
to relevant pages during which participants judged relevance. The
second one was used to classify visits to irrelevant pages and
visits to relevant pages during which participants judged
relevance. Because of the class imbalance in our datasets, we used
up-sampling [15] to simulate additional data points, thereby
improving balance across classes. For both models, we used
flexible discriminant analysis (FDA) and all five variables were
included as predictors (Table 1). The parameters of the two
models were tuned to maximize Receiver Operating Characteristic
(ROC) and cross-fold validation was used to evaluate the
performance of the models. Outcomes of both our classification
models showed that the relative pupil dilation was the most
important predictor (Table 5). The models’ performances are
shown in Table 6.

Table 3. Pupil dilation (mean(SD))
Level
Page and visit types
1
first visit
Irrelevant page
2
revisit
3
first visit*
Relevant page*
4
revisit*
5
Rel. page visit with relevance judgment

Pupil dilation
-0.0497 (0.053)

-0.045
(0.054)

-0.0362 (0.054)

-0.036
(0.059)

- 0.0319 (0.063)

-0.0428 (0.055)

- 0.033 (0.059)
* shows counts after removing visits when relevance judgments were made, which
are contained in level 5

Table 5. Variable importance for two classification models
Variable
Fixation duration
Saccade duration
Saccade length
Saccade angle
Relative pupil dilation

The post-hoc pairwise comparisons (all checked at p<.05)
indicated significant differences in relative change in pupil size in
almost all cases, except between revisits to irrelevant and relevant
pages and visits when relevance judgment took place; pupil
dilation was the largest on these visits, while the smallest dilation
was on first visits to irrelevant pages. For other variables, the
pairwise comparisons indicated significant differences in only in a
few cases. A significantly longer fixation durations on revisits to
relevant pages compared with revisits to irrelevant and first visits
to relevant pages. Saccade duration on the first visits to relevant
pages tended to be longer than on irrelevant pages. The slowest
saccades were on relevance judgment visits to relevant pages. The
pixel-length of saccades was significantly longer on all visits to
irrelevant pages compared with first visits to relevant pages. The
length of saccades was significantly shortest on first visits to
relevant vs. revisits or relevance judgment visits to these pages.
These results generally confirm our hypotheses, though, to a
different extent for different variables; their pattern of significance
is shown in Table 4.

+

+

+

+
+

+

+

+

+

+
+
+

+
+

+

+

Sensitivity
0.57
0.57

Specificity
0.57
0.62

The findings show that several eye-tracking derived measures
significantly differ between user visits and revisits to relevant and
irrelevant Wikipedia pages.
In particular, a larger pupil dilation on visits to relevant pages
indicates, in part, a higher mental effort and attention paid to
relevant pages, and particularly so on revisits or when a relevance
judgment was finally made. This result is inline with the results
presented in [10, 21], but it also extends them, since our
investigation distinguished first and subsequent visits to pages.

Comparisons between 5-level factor levels

+

Accuracy
0.57
0.61

5. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

1-2 1-3 1-4 1-5 2-3 2-4 2-5 3-4 3-5 4-5

+
+

Model 2
29.66
59.94
0.00
54.94
100.00

Table 6. Classification model performance
Model
Model 1
Model 2

Table 4. Summary of pairwise comparisons
Variable
Fixation duration
Saccade duration
Saccade length
Saccade angle
Relative pupil dilation

Model 1
29.38
81.27
46.70
0.00
100.00

Average pupil dilation during page viewing states did not
differentiate between revisits and relevance judgment visits to
relevant pages. However, we showed that the significantly larger
pupil dilation in the last 2 seconds before the relevance judgment
was made, should enable one to differentiate the relevance
judgment visits from any other visits to Web pages. This result
can be plausibly explained by increased attention during relevance
judgment.

+

+ indicates significant pairwise comparison.
For numbering of the 5-level factor levels please see Table 2.

One can expect significant cognitive processes to take place
shortly before a decision is made. Therefore, we separately
examined the last 2 seconds period of each page viewing state and
compared differences between all visits with relevance judgment
visits. The Wilcoxon rank sum test showed a significant
difference for pupil dilation (W = 479178, p<<.0001). The same
test also showed a significant difference between the first and the
last two seconds of a visit to a relevant page during with relevance
judgment (W = 45615.5, p<0.0001). Other variables were not
significantly different. In both cases, pupil tended to be larger
during the two second period before the relevance decision was
made.

Results with respect to fixation duration, saccade duration and
length, generally confirm prior work. For example [5, 10], where
a tendency for visual scanning of irrelevant pages and continuous
reading of relevant pages was shown. Our results indicate that on
revisits to relevant pages and when relevance judgments were
made, the Web pages were read more carefully.
Previous studies that employed eye-tracking in characterization of
text relevance were typically conducted under more constrained
human-information interaction and, for example, examined only
reading of prepared sentences [20], paragraphs [8] or short text
documents [10] and not user-selected Web pages. Our work

813

extends the prior research by investigating more realistic and
complex interactive information retrieval scenarios on the Web
and by conducting analysis at the level of page viewing states,
which we constructed to isolate cognitive activities not related to
document viewing/reading.

[6] Da Costa Pereira, C. et al. 2012. Multidimensional
relevance: Prioritized aggregation in a personalized
Information Retrieval setting. Information Processing &
Management. 48, 2, 340–357.
[7] Cutrell, E. and Guan, Z. 2007. What are you looking for?: an
eye-tracking study of information usage in web search.
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems (New York, NY), 407–416.
[8] Fahey, D. et al. 2011. Document Classification on
Relevance: A Study on Eye Gaze Patterns for Reading.
Neural Information Processing. B.-L. Lu et al., eds. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg. 143–150.
[9] Greisdorf, H. 2003. Relevance thresholds: a multi-stage
predictive model of how users evaluate information.
Information Processing & Management. 39, 3, 403–423.
[10] Gwizdka, J. 2014. Characterizing Relevance with Eyetracking Measures. Proceedings of the 5th Information
Interaction in Context Symposium (New York, NY), 58–67.
[11] Hossain, G. and Yeasin, M. 2014. Understanding Effects of
Cognitive Load from Pupillary Responses Using Hilbert
Analytic Phase. 2014 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition Workshops (CVPRW) (Jun. 2014),
381–386.
[12] Huang, X. and Soergel, D. 2013. Relevance: An improved
framework for explicating the notion. JASIST. 64, 1, 18–35.
[13] iMotions 2014. Attention Tool Biometric Research Platform:
Version. iMotions, Inc.
[14] Joachims, T. et al. 2007. Evaluating the accuracy of implicit
feedback from clicks and query reformulations in Web
search. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. 25, 2.
[15] Kuhn, M. and Johnson, K. 2013. Applied Predictive
Modeling. Springer Science & Business Media.
[16] Loboda, T.D. et al. 2011. Inferring word relevance from eyemovements of readers. Proceedings of the 16th international
conference on Intelligent user interfaces (New York, NY),
175–184.
[17] Oliveira, F.T.P. et al. 2009. Discriminating the relevance of
web search results with measures of pupil size. Proceedings
of the 27th ACM international conference on Human factors
in computing systems CHI'2009 (Boston, MA), 2209–2212.
[18] Onorati, F. et al. 2013. Characterization of affective states by
pupillary dynamics and autonomic correlates. Frontiers in
Neuroengineering. 6, 9.
[19] Pan, B. et al. 2004. The determinants of web page viewing
behavior: an eye-tracking study. Proceedings of the 2004
symposium on Eye tracking research & applications (New
York, NY), 147–154.
[20] Simola, J. et al. 2008. Using hidden Markov model to
uncover processing states from eye movements in
information search tasks. Cognitive Systems Research. 9, 4,
237–251.
[21] Villa, R. and Halvey, M. 2013. Is relevance hard work?:
evaluating the effort of making relevant assessments.
Proceedings of SIGIR'2013 (New York, NY, US), 765–768.
[22] Wei, X. et al. 2014. YASFIIRE: Yet Another System for IIR
Evaluation. Proceedings of the 5th Information Interaction
in Context Symposium (New York, NY), 316–319.
[23] Yilmaz, E. et al. 2014. Relevance and Effort: An Analysis of
Document Utility. Proceedings of CIKM'2014 (New York,
NY), 91–100.

The classification results demonstrate a promise in using eyetracking variables in predicting user’s perceived relevance of
Wikipedia pages. While accuracy of the two models shown in this
paper is rather modest, it could be improved by combining with
other interaction data and by applying further processing to pupil
size, following, for example, approaches described in [11, 17].
One of the motivations of our work was the notion multi-stage of
relevance judgment, the differences in variables between the visits
and revisits provide some indirect support for it. Interestingly,
patterns of pairwise comparison significance (Table 4) differ in all
but two cases (1-3 and 3-5). Plausibly one could use different
combinations of variables to infer different types of page viewing
states (Table 2). This finding is a likely indication of differences
in cognitive processes, such as shifts in mode of reading (e.g.,
scanning, skimming, and continuous reading) and levels of mental
workload and attention changing between visits and revisits to
pages at different levels of relevance.
A limitation of the current analysis is that we did not use time
sequence analysis that would allow for more direct modeling of a
sequence of stages in document assessment. In the future, we plan
to apply techniques such as Hidden-Markov Modeling (HMM) to
our data.
Other limitations include, a bias in our data towards relevance as
well as use of only one web site, the English Wikipedia. We
believe that our results should generalize to other text-heavy web
pages and in our future work we plan to broaden the set of web
pages we use and to address other limitations. In addition, our
analysis was conducted at an aggregate level across all users and
all tasks. In the follow up work, we will also examine data at an
individual user and task levels.

6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported, in part, by IMLS Career
Development Grant #RE-04-11-0062-11A to Jacek Gwizdka.

7. REFERENCES
[1] Azzopardi, L. 2014. Modelling Interaction with Economic
Models of Search. Proceedings of SIGIR'2014 (New York,
NY), 3–12.
[2] Bailey, E. and Kelly, D. 2011. Is amount of effort a better
predictor of search success than use of specific search
tactics? Proceedings of the American Society for Information
Science and Technology. 48, 1, 1–10.
[3] Borlund, P. 2003. The concept of relevance in IR. JASIST.
54, 10, 913–925.
[4] Brumby, D.P. and Howes, A. 2008. Strategies for Guiding
Interactive Search: An Empirical Investigation Into the
Consequences of Label Relevance for Assessment and
Selection. Human–Computer Interaction. 23, 1, 1–46.
[5] Buscher, G. et al. 2012. Attentive documents: Eye tracking
as implicit feedback for information retrieval and beyond.
ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst. 1, 2, 9:1–9:30.

814

