Searcher in a Strange Land: Understanding Web Search
from Familiar and Unfamiliar Locations
Elad Kravi1,2 , Eugene Agichtein2,4 , Ido Guy2 , Yaron Kanza3 , Avihai Mejer2 , Dan Pelleg2
1
Technion, Israel 2 Yahoo Labs, Israel 3 Cornell Tech, USA 4 Emory University, USA
ekravi@cs.technion.ac.il, {agichtein,amejer}@yahoo-inc.com, {idoguy,pellegd}@acm.org, kanza@cornell.edu

ABSTRACT

To address this problem, we propose a new approach to geographical personalization—an approach that is user-centric
and is based on how familiar the searcher is with the location. Previous studies along this line explored a functional typology, and in particular focused on a small set of
labels (“home”, “work”, and sometimes “school”) [10]. We
argue that a complementary view revolves around the level
of familiarity users have with their surroundings. In this
respect, “home” would be considered a familiar place (as
would “work” or “school”), e.g., in contrast to a city that the
user visits for the first time. The difference being that in a
familiar place, basic needs of the user, such as food, transportation and place to live in, are generally part of a routine.
In these familiar environments, constituting a user’s “natural habitat”, the user is likely to have prior knowledge for
many basic needs, especially those related to the physical environment. As a result, in a familiar environment, the user
may be free to focus on higher-level search activities that
satisfy leisure needs and/or may require deeper level of involvement. We call a search in such environments F-search,
and argue that these environments result in a distinct set of
information needs and search patterns.
The natural complement, still under the user-centric view,
are unfamiliar places. This generally corresponds to an outof-town scenario, but not always—a frequented location is
considered “familiar”, even if distant from the user’s home.
An unfamiliar place is simply a place that is seldom visited,
or is visited for the first time, and we refer to a search in
such places as U-search.
In this work, we formally define a model that distinguishes
between F-search and U-search and we apply it to a search
query log on a large scale. We hypothesize that the information needs in unfamiliar locations are different from those in
familiar locations and we show experimentally that familiarity affects the type of web searches users conduct.
Several studies compared information needs in mobile versus desktop search [2–4, 6]. Our distinction between search
from familiar and unfamiliar locations is device-independent:
while we expect more searches from mobile devices to be
from unfamiliar locations, our model does not explicitly consider the device type and our findings suggest that both
types of searches are conducted from both desktop and mobile devices. Yom-Tov and Diaz [9] showed that in a case of a
natural disaster, the information needs considerably change
based on the distance from the event’s location. White and
Buscher [8] compared searches of restaurants by local and
non-local users and showed that local knowledge enabled
finding venues of higher quality. None of these studies, how-

With mobile devices, web search is no longer limited to specific locations. People conduct search from practically anywhere, including at home, at work, when traveling and when
on vacation. How should this influence search tools and web
services? In this paper, we argue that information needs are
affected by the familiarity of the environment. To formalize this idea, we propose a new contextualization model for
activities on the web. The model distinguishes between a
search from a familiar place (F-search) and a search from
an unfamiliar place (U-search). We formalize the notion of
familiarity, and propose a method to identify familiar places.
An analysis of a query log of millions of users, demonstrates
the differences between search activities in familiar and in
unfamiliar locations. Our novel take on search contextualization has the potential to improve web applications, such
as query autocompletion and search personalization.

Keywords
Web search modeling; search personalization; query language modeling; location-based search

1.

INTRODUCTION

Mobile devices have led to a paradigm shift from web
search that is mainly conducted in specific locations to search
that is being done virtually anywhere and is frequently related to the geographic environment. Consequently, many
search engines provide a location-centric search, where the
answer is affected by the location of the user, and it has
been shown that this improves search results [1]. However,
searches by residents and searches by infrequent visitors typically reflect different needs. For example, a search query
“train dog”, issued by a visitor, should refer to the regulations of traveling with a dog on a train. But for a local,
it should relate to puppy training. As another example, in
New York City, an obvious query auto-completion of “natural” is “natural history museum” for a tourist, but “natural
gas” or “natural food” for residents.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR ’15, August 09–13, 2015, Santiago, Chile.
Copyright 2015 ACM 978-1-4503-3621-5/15/08 ...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2766462.2767782.

855

ever, propose or study the distinction between familiar and
unfamiliar search locations.
The contributions of this paper include the following.

In our experiments, we opted to set r to 2, requiring that a
user will return at least twice to a place in order for it to become a familiar place for the user (unless it is the sole search
place). Parameter t was set to be 10%, because this balanced
between the two conditions, giving them a roughly equal
weight. That is, inspecting all pairs (u, P ), such that user
u conducted a search activity in place P , applying merely
Condition 1 with t = 10% deemed 53.6% of the places in
these pairs as familiar, while applying merely Condition 2
with r = 2 deemed 53.3% of the places as familiar, causing
both conditions to be almost equally selective. With both
of these parameters jointly applied, 51.4% of the places were
considered familiar to their corresponding user.

• A new characterization of search queries to distinguish
between F-search in “familiar” places versus U-search
in “unfamiliar” locations, defined on a per-user basis.
• Analysis of massive search logs, showing that the distinction provides useful information.
• Qualitative analysis that demonstrates the differences
in language models and suggests potential applications,
such as query auto-completion.

2.

CONTEXTUALIZATION MODEL

3.

We now formally define search familiarity. Let U be a set
of users. Each user u ∈ U is associated with a set of search
activities Su , where an activity is a query submitted to a
search engine followed by a click on one of the results.
To each search activity s in Su , we associate the time of
the search and the location of the user at that time, denoted
t(s) and l(s), respectively. An activity is also associated with
the search query, the clicked link, and the type of the device
on which the search was conducted.
The search locations of a user u is the set Lu = {l(s) |
s ∈ Su } of all the locations of the activities of u. Our goal
is to distinguish in Lu between familiar locations, in which
u is regularly active, and the locations in which the activity
is sporadic. In this research, we partition the geographical
space into areas, according to zip-codes, and consider each
area as a place. Each place is associated with the activities
whose location is in this place, and for a specific user u and
a place P , the set Su (P ) is the set of searches of u within P .
When the user conducts many searches merely from a single place, we naturally assume that this place is familiar to
the user. Next, we consider cases where the user performs
searches from more than one place. Intuitively, we define
a place as familiar if the search activities of the user reveal
that the user has been active in this place during many days
and in several occasions.
Formally, we define Daysu (P ) as the set of days on which
u conducted a search from P , i.e., all the days that contain
a time t(s) for some search activity s ∈ Su in place P . By
Daysu , we denote all the days on which there is some search
activity of u (in any place). We say that the time spent of
u (P )|
. A return of user u
u at P is the ratio TSu (P ) = |Days
|Daysu |
to place P is a case where first, there is a search activity of
u in P , then a search activity of u from at least one place
different than P , and again, a search from P .

SEARCH CHARACTERISTICS

In this section, we analyze the different aspects of search
activities in familiar and unfamiliar places. First, we present
our experimental setup and provide some statistics regarding
users and their searches.
Our dataset includes more than a billion search actions
sampled from the logs of a popular commercial search engine
during a period of six months. These queries were posted
by more than 35 million unique users from about 30,000 US
zip codes. The dataset includes only users with at least 20
recorded search activities and at least 20 days of activity.
On average, during the inspected time period, each of these
users performed search activities from 9.15 different places
(stdev: 12.79, median: 4). For places, the average number
of users per place was 3887 (stdev: 5123.91, median 235).
Distribution of time spent: Obviously, search activities are not conducted everywhere and all the time. So, how
are they distributed? There are many places in which people are only seldom active and only a few places in which
people are active during many days. To illustrate this, we
calculated the distribution of activity days per places and
the results are depicted in Fig. 1. A point (d, p) on the
graph indicates that in p percent of the search places, the
user was active during at least d percent of the days. While
69.3% of the places account for at least 1% of the activity
days, only 19.2% of the places account for at least 5% of
the days; 11.0% account for at least 10% of the days, and in
6.4% of the places, the activity spanned more than 20% of
the user’s activity days. This shows the effect of changing
t in Definition 2.1—increasing t will reduce the number of
places that are deemed familiar, roughly following a powerlaw distribution.
Home as a familiar place: As a first step of verifying
our model, we examined how often the defined home of a
user u is deemed a familiar place of u. To this end, we define
the minimum F-search distance from home as the minimal
distance between the location of an F-search and the location of the declared home of the user (for users with at least
one familiar place and a declared home). Fig. 2 shows the
percentage of users whose minimum F-search distance from
home was smaller than a given distance d. For 53.9% of
these users, the distance was smaller than 20 kilometers and
for 75.4% of the users it was smaller than 100 kilometers.
This result agrees with prior work which analyzed all page
views, rather than just search actions [7]. Overall, this confirms that in many cases the home of the user is a familiar
place, but not always, since the declared home is not always
the actual home of the user (e.g., a fake or obsolete address).

Definition 2.1 (F-search). A place P is familiar to
user u if one of the following two cases holds. (i) All the
activities of u are in P . (ii) Given a time-spent ratio t and
a return count r, P is familiar with respect to t and r, if
(1) TSu (P ) ≥ t, i.e. the time spent of u at P is at least
t, and (2) the number of returns of u to P is at least r. A
search activity of user u in a familiar place of u is considered
an F-search.
A place P that is not familiar to user u is considered
unfamiliar to u and we refer to a search activity of u at
such place as U-search.

856

Figure 1: Distribution of activity
time in places.

Figure 2: Distribution of the minimum F-search distance from home.

Figure 3: Percentage of F-search
and U-search for different devices.

Uni-grams
F -Search U -Search
facebook
google
sale
restaurant
free
schedule
games
football
ebay
ny
how
lyrics
login
ct
online
store
craiglist
movie
recipes
hours
porn
locations
tube
mall

Figure 4:
Distribution of the number of familiar
and unfamiliar places per user.

Bi-grams
F -Search
U -Search
for sale
new york
how to
phone number
facebook login
google search
to make
new jersey
homes for
high school
cool math
how many
you tube
hobby lobby
sales in
in new
funeral home
football schedule
real estate
r us
black friday
movie theater
for kids
nfl scores

Table 1: The top 12 distinctive query terms of Fsearches and U-searches.

Figure 5:

unfamiliar places. To this end, we built two specialized language models (LMs)—one for F-searches and one for Usearches. To build language models that would scale to the
large query log volume, we used the Berkeley LM library [5],
which provides an efficient and scalable implementation of
n-gram LMs. For unknown terms we used standard Laplace
smoothing with  of 1 over the size of the vocabulary in the
training data. After creating the LMs, we set out to identify
the terms with the highest divergence between the familiar
and unfamiliar models. Specifically, Table 1 presents the
top 12 uni-grams and bi-grams with the highest KullbackLeibler (KL) divergence scores between the two models, after
stop-word removal.
It can be seen that the F-search lists consist of activities
related to shopping, social networks, games, knowledge seeking and adult content. The U-search lists, in contrast, are
focused on searching for location or schedule of restaurants,
movies, malls, cities, institutes, and sport events. The top
word in the uni-gram lists reflect the fundamental difference
between the two types of information needs: it is “google”
for U-searches and “facebook” for F-searches. Both are the
two most popular sites on the web (according to Alexa.com).
The first is focused on search and the second on social networking, indicating general information needs while in unfamiliar places, compared to stronger social information needs
in familiar places.
Inspecting the main categories of the top 100 uni-grams
and bi-grams, we found similar trends. The top F-search
queries included keywords that relate to the following categories: shopping (15%), e.g., ‘sales’ and ‘amazon’; social
media (10%), e.g., ‘twitter’, ‘tumblr’ and ‘youtube’; multimedia (9%), e.g., ‘video’, ‘photos’, ‘netflix’, ‘watch’; adult
content (6%), e.g., ‘porn’, ‘pornhub’, ‘sex’; news (6%), e.g.,
‘news’, ‘yahoo’, and ‘msn’; email (5%), e.g., ‘gmail’, ‘hotmail’; games (4%), e.g., ‘angry birds’, ‘games’; family (4%),
e.g., ‘wife’, ‘children’; healthcare (4%), e.g., ‘medicine’,
‘symptoms’, ‘pregnant’.

F-search portion per place.

Familiar and unfamiliar places: Fig. 4 presents the
distribution of the number of familiar and unfamiliar places
per user, according to Definition 2.1. About a quarter of
the users do not have familiar places at all; the majority of
the users (58.5%) have one familiar place, while a little over
15% of the users have two or more familiar places. As for
unfamiliar places, while 32.2% of the users have no U-search
activities at all, for the remaining users, the number of unfamiliar places in which they were active is typically much
higher than the number of familiar places: only 10.7% of the
users have exactly one unfamiliar place in which they posed
a query, while 28.3% of the users have ten or more unfamiliar
places and 13.7% have 20 or more unfamiliar places.
F-Search and U-search activities per place: Fig. 5
presents the distribution of the portion of F-searches per
place. In only 3.1% of the places, less than 10% of the
searches were F-searches. In almost 80% of the places (16.2+
15.0+26.2+22.5), there are more F-searches than U-searches.
In nearly 50% of the places (26.2 + 22.5), over 80% of the
search activities were F-searches.
The effect of the device: In Fig. 3, we see that the
device affects the percentage of F-searches. As expected,
on desktops and on tablets, almost all the searches are Fsearches, whereas on mobile phones, slightly more than 50%
of the searches are U-searches. Surprisingly, in this measure,
tablets are more similar to desktops than to mobile phones.
F-Search vs. U-search query language: To gain better intuition into the differences between F-searches and Usearches, we investigated which keywords characterize queries
sent from familiar places as compared to queries sent from

857

Category
Food

Travel

Local

Leisure

Prefix
coffee
steak
pizza
gas
train
car
court
science
police
wild
soccer
piano

Familiar
table:2, shop:4
marinade:1, house:2
dough:3, places:5
fireplace:3, station:6
crash:1, schedule:7
games:2, wash:6
cases:1, house:4
news:4, museum:10
scanner:2, department:9
rice:2, horse:5
drills:4, scores:13
sheet:2, bar:8

Unfamiliar
shop:2, table:5
house:1, marinade:4
places:3, dough:5
station:3, fireplace:8
schedule:2, crash:6
wash:2, games:7
house:1, cases:2
museum:3, news:7
department:2, scanner:4
horse:2, rice:4
scores:5, drills:7
bar:2, sheet:4

completion “crash” is the first ranked in familiar places, while
less frequent (6th ) at unfamiliar places, whereas “schedule”
is ranked high (2nd ) in unfamiliar places, but lower (7th ) in
familiar places; for the term “court”, “cases” is the top completion in familiar places, as users may have more time for
looking into these, while “house” is the top completion in unfamiliar places, reflecting more ad-hoc needs. These results
suggest that for popular query categories, search suggestions
ranking should take user’s location familiarity into account.

4.2

Table 2: Sample word completion patterns reporting
the first word (prefix), and example completions, excluding stop words, with rank, sorted by decreasing
completion frequency for the familiar and unfamiliar
settings, respectively.
The top U-searches included keywords related to the following categories: entertainment (25%), e.g., ‘restaurant’,
‘movie’, ‘mall’, ‘club’; tourism (16%), e.g., ‘airport’, ‘weather’,
‘los angeles’, ‘texas’; navigation (15%), e.g., ‘directions’,
‘location’, ‘street’; sports (5%), e.g., ‘nfl’, ‘espn’, ‘scores’.
Overall, in familiar places, people search for more profound information that requires time (and state-of-mind)
exploring, watching, reading and interacting. In unfamiliar
places, on the other hand, there is a greater need for quick
lookups for more “touristic” information needs such as food
and entertainment, with focus on navigation, directions, and
opening times.

4.

DISCUSSION

We defined and demonstrated some of the differences between F-search and U-search. This distinction can be of
value in practical applications for personalization of search
results, news-feed items, or recommendations. Specifically,
we now demonstrate how F-search/U-search distinction can
be useful for query auto-completion.

4.1

Query Auto-Completion

In query auto-completion, the user types a few characters or the first word of the search query, and the system
predicts potential queries. Based on the observations above
and on our analysis of familiar and unfamiliar query patterns, we propose to use this information to improve query
auto-completion. Specifically, we propose to use different
completions for familiar versus unfamiliar places. To gain
some intuition into the different completions, we present examples of different completions for common query categories
in Table 2. For these examples, we report the initial word of
the query, in the dataset described above, together with excerpts from the query completion lists, ranked in decreasing
order by completion frequency (in the format of ‘<completion word>:<rank>’). For example, in the “Food” category,
the F-searches focus on aspects more likely to be performed
in one’s home, such as marinading a steak or buying a coffee table. In contrast, in unfamiliar places, food aspects
more likely to focus on immediate needs, such as pizza places
(higher on the list for unfamiliar places) or steak houses. A
similar effect can be observed in the “Travel”, “Local”, and
“Leisure” categories. For example, for the term “train”, the

858

Other Applications

Different applications can benefit from a new contextualization model that distinguishes between familiar and unfamiliar locations of search. Obviously, and based on our
preliminary results, in web search it is beneficial to provide
different results to F-searches and to U-searches. A natural
extension is to use the proposed distinction in web advertising and recommender systems: for unfamiliar places, touristic services would be suggested, but in F-search, daily needs
will populate the ads and recommendations. Even navigation systems may benefit from the suggested distinction—in
an unfamiliar surrounding, people prefer the simplest routes
to follow. But locals will take the fastest (traffic-adjusted)
way, however convoluted. We are exploring these topics for
follow-up works.

5.

REFERENCES

[1] P. N. Bennett, F. Radlinski, R. W. White, and
E. Yilmaz. Inferring and using location metadata to
personalize web search. In Proc. of SIGIR, 2011.
[2] K. Church and B. Smyth. Understanding the Intent
Behind Mobile Information Needs. In International
Conf. on Intelligent User Interfaces, 2009.
[3] M. Kamvar and S. Baluja. A Large Scale Study of
Wireless Search Behavior: Google Mobile Search. In
Proc. of SIGCHI, 2006.
[4] M. Kamvar, M. Kellar, R. Patel, and Y. Xu.
Computers and Iphones and Mobile Phones, Oh My!:
A Logs-based Comparison of Search Users on Different
Devices. In Proc. of WWW, 2009.
[5] A. Pauls and D. Klein. Faster and smaller n-gram
language models. In Proc. of the 49th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies-Volume 1, 2011.
[6] D. Pelleg, D. Savenkov, and E. Agichtein. Touch
Screens for Touchy Issues: Analysis of Accessing
Sensitive Information from Mobile Devices. In
ICWSM, 2013.
[7] D. Pelleg, E. Yom-Tov, and Y. Maarek. Can you
believe an anonymous contributor? on truthfulness in
Yahoo! answers. In SocialCom, 2012.
[8] R. White and G. Buscher. Characterizing Local
Interests and Local Knowledge. In SIGCHI, 2012.
[9] E. Yom-Tov and F. Diaz. Out of Sight, Not out of
Mind: On the Effect of Social and Physical
Detachment on Information Need. In SIGIR, 2011.
[10] H. Zang and J. Bolot. Anonymization of location data
does not work: A large-scale measurement study. In
Proc. of MobiCom, 2011.

