Reachability based Ranking in Interactive Image Retrieval
Jiyi Li
Department of Social Informatics, Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University
Yoshida-Honmachi, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, JAPAN

garfieldpigljy@gmail.com

ABSTRACT

Figure 1 shows an example of Google image search 1 . After
a user inputs “Kyoto” as the keyword for search, Google
returns the initial image search results. There is a link
of “search by image” for each image in the search results.
The user can click these links to reach further results until he finds satisfied results. After several rounds, this user
finally finds his target image which may be about the cherryblossom at Arashiyama in Kyoto in spring.

In some interactive image retrieval systems, users can select
images from image search results and click to view their similar or related images until they reach the targets. Existing
image ranking options are based on relevance, update time,
interestingness and so on. Because the inexact description of
user targets or unsatisfying performance of image retrieval
methods, it is possible that users cannot reach their targets
in single-round interaction. When we consider multi-round
interactions, how to assist users to select the images that are
easier to reach the targets in fewer rounds is a useful issue.
In this paper, we propose a new kind of ranking option to
users by ranking the images according to their difficulties
of reaching potential targets. We model the interactive image search behavior as navigation on information network
constructed by an image collection and an image retrieval
method. We use the properties of this information network
for reachability based ranking. Experiments based on a social image collection show the efficiency of our approach.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information
Search and Retrieval—Retrieval models
Figure 1: Example of Interactive Image Retrieval

Keywords

Existing image ranking options are based on content or
context relevance, update time, interestingness and so on.
They concentrate on initial image search results or refined
results of the single-round interaction. They do not consider
the possible results in subsequent multi-round interactions.
However, some reasons can lead to users’ failures on reaching
the targets in the initial or refined results. For example,
users do not exactly describe their specific targets in the
queries and single-round interactions because it is a difficult
or boring task; users’ targets may be still not clear when
they start their searches, because they are just seeking the
information they are interested in; the performance of image
retrieval methods are still not good enough to return results
which can match the query topics or detect user intentions
for personalized search results.
If we can assist users to select the images that are easier
to reach the targets, users can cost fewer interactions and
spend less time in search sessions. For this purpose, we need
to consider what kind of results can be returned after multiround interactions. In this paper, we propose a new kind

Interactive Image Retrieval; Information Network; Ranking

1.

INTRODUCTION

When users search images in an image collection, they first
input some queries, which can be keywords or images, to get
some initial image search results. When the initial results
are not satisfied, some image retrieval systems provide interfaces of user interactions, e.g, relevance feedback, to gather
additional information for refining the search results.
They allow users to click images to view other similar or
related images until they reach the targets. For example,
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR’15, August 09 - 13, 2015, Santiago, Chile.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-3621-5/15/08 ...$15.00.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2766462.2767777 .

1

867

http://images.google.com

of ranking option by ranking the images, according to their
difficulties of reaching the potential targets.
The image search behavior with multi-round interactions
in a search session can be regarded as navigation on the information space of an image collection. A query image or
the first clicked image in the search results of a query keyword can be the start of this navigation. The end of this
navigation can be some images which may contain the final target images. The user may find the targets or fail to
find the targets in current search session and give up at the
end of this navigation. We thus construct an image information network for interactive image retrieval on a given
image collection based on a specific image retrieval method.
The nodes in the network are images, and the edges in the
network depend on the image retrieval method which can
return top k search results from the image collection for a
given image.
We leverage the properties of this information network
which can indicate the difficulty of reaching target images
from start images to propose our ranking method. Note that
our work of ranking by reachability is used as a ranking option on the image search results, like ranking by relevance,
update time, and so on. It is independent on the image retrieval methods which are used to generate the search results
and construct the information network. It can be integrated
with these methods.
The contributions of this paper are as follows.
First, we propose a novel kind of image ranking option
based on the ideal reachability of images to other images. It
is able to reduce the rounds of user interactions and accelerate the processes of reaching the targets in search sessions.
Second, we construct image information network for a
given image collection based on a specific image retrieval
method to reflect user navigation behavior on the images.
The properties of this information network are used for our
image ranking approach.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section 2 we list some related work. In section 3 we propose
our image ranking approach. We report the experimental
results in Section 4 and give a conclusion in Section 5.

2.

tive image retrieval, we first construct the information network for a given image collection based on a specific image
retrieval method. After that, we rank the images in the
search results of the image retrieval method based on the
properties of image nodes in the information network.

3.1

RELATED WORK

On one hand, Datta et al. [1] list many works on image
retrieval. Many of them focus on the issue of one query and
its direct image search results without further interactions.
On the other hand, Relevance feedback (RF) has been
widely used in image re-ranking in supervised scenarios and
is an important solution in interactive image retrieval. Rui
et al. [2] and Porkaew et al. [3] proposed query re-weighting,
reformulation, modification, point movement and expansion
approaches. Tang et al. [4] used one click relevance feedback
which only required the user to click only one query image to
minimize the effort of relevance feedback instance selection.
The ranking methods used in all above-mentioned related
work are relevance based while our work is reachability based.
They mainly consider only single-round user interaction and
the corresponding ranking results. They do not consider the
scenario of multi-round interactions in the search sessions.

3.

Interactive Image Retrieval

Our model of interactive image retrieval is as follows. We
define an image as ai in a given image collection C. In a
search session, the queries that user input can be images or
keywords. In the case of query by image, the start image is
the query; in the case of query by keyword, the start image is
the clicked image in the initial search result. The start image
can also be any clicked image which is not the target in the
search session. This definition of start image can simplify
the constructed information network with only one type of
nodes. Each node in this graph represents an image. There
is no node representing other types of objects such as text.
It can simplify the analysis on the graph when using it for
various applications.
It may be boring for users to input too many additional
actions in user interactions, and users may prefer succinct
and convenient interfaces. Therefore, in our scenario of interactive image retrieval, in each round of user interaction, a
user selects and clicks only one image. After the user clicks,
a specific image retrieval method F is used to return top k
image search results by using this clicked image as query.
This image retrieval method can use either visual content
information or textual context information of the clicked image. Such one click interface is used in recent image search
engine like Google image search. There are several rounds
of user interactions in a search session. The images clicked
in all rounds construct a navigation sequence on the graph.
In addition, even if multiple images are clicked in one round,
we can regarded that there is a unique path from the start
to the target and one of the clicked images is on this path.
The definition of search session is somewhat different from
existing work in the areas like web page search. We assume
that when a user modifies his original query, the current
search session is regarded as finished, no matter whether
the user reaches his targets. There are no jumps from one
image node to another image node between which there is
no edge because such a jump is regarded as a new session. In
this way, the navigation behavior on the image information
network in a search session is continuous by following the
edges on the graph.

3.2

Information Network Construction

The steps of image information network construction for
an image collection C based on an image retrieval method
F are as follows.
1. Create a node for each image ai in C.
2. For each image ai , compute its top k image search
results Ai from the image collection by using the image retrieval method F .
3. Create an edge from ai to each image aj in Ai . This
image information network Gk is thus a directed graph.
Because we assume that users only view and click the
images from the top k ranked images in the search engine
results page (SERP). The out degree of nodes in this constructed information network is at most k. This constraint
is able to control the number of edges of the graph and the
time cost when computing the graph properties for analysis.

OUR RANKING APPROACH

In this section, we introduce our detailed reachability based
ranking approach. After modeling our scenario of interac-

868

In addition, the relevance score or similarity score between
ai and each image aj in Ai can be stored as the weights of
the edges. Because it is not necessary in this paper, we still
use same weights (equal to 1) for all edges.

3.3

centrality computation, so that our approach can handle
large scale image collections.
Furthermore, the ranking approach provides general ranking results and does not consider specific user intention, for
the future work, we will focus on how to detect specific user
intention and predict personalized targets by utilizing the
graph model and partial navigation sequence.

Reachability Based Image Ranking

This constructed information network has various potential applications, for example, global performance evaluation
of image retrieval methods on data collections, user intention
detection in a search session and final user targets prediction.
In this paper, we use it to rank images based on reachability
to potential targets. Our ranking approach provides a different ranking option by reachability. It can be integrated with
various image retrieval methods which are used to generated
the search results.
In the communities of graph theory and social network
analysis, many metrics have been proposed for analyzing
various properties of graph and information network, e.g.,
average shortest path, diameter, centrality and so on. The
length of shortest path of two images on information network
can show the difficulty of reaching the target image from the
start image in ideal. Some centrality measures of nodes are
defined based on shortest path, for example, betweenness
centrality and closeness centrality.
Betweenness centrality of an image node is defined as the
number of shortest paths from all nodes to all others that
pass through this node. Closeness centrality of an image
node is defined as the inverse of the sum of the length of the
shortest path of this node to all other nodes. They can indicate the reachability of the nodes to potential targets, and
we will use them to provide two alternatives for our ranking
approach. For the given image collection C, specific image
retrieval method F and information network Gk , we rank
these top k images based on one of the centrality measures.
These two centrality measures represent different assumptions on user behaviors. Betweenness centrality assumes
that from start node as to target node at a user selects
the shortest path pst , and the evaluated node ai is on the
shortest path. Closeness centrality assumes that from the
evaluated node ai to the target node at a user selects the
shortest path pit . Both of these two assumptions are ideal
because of using shortest paths. Users may not select the
ideal shortest paths to reach the targets. West et al. [5]
made an analysis of human wayfinding in entity information
network. They find that human wayfinding is different from
shortest paths but is still very efficient. Our ranking method
is to assist users to select the paths more close to ideal ones
if users select the top ranked results by our ranking method.
These two centrality measures are global and computed
based on the whole image information network Gk . We use
Gephi [7] to compute the centralities. The information network construction and computation of centrality for a large
graph are time-consuming. It results in the dynamic problem and scalability problem. Current implementation of our
approach needs offline pre-computation and is proper for
static image collection which does not update frequently and
is not too large. In the experiments, we use a public social
image collection with tens of thousands of images.
To solve the dynamic problem, a solution is to do the
offline pre-computation at some timestamps. To solve the
scalability problem, in the future work, we can use the approximate algorithms in the existing work such as [6] for

4.
4.1

EXPERIMENT
Experimental Settings

The dataset we use for our experiments is MIRFlickr 25000
[8] which is constructed by images and tags downloaded from
Flickr. It contains 25,000 images and provides the raw tags
of these images on Flickr. We use two kinds of visual features
as two different content based image retrieval approaches.
One is a color feature. The feature descriptor is a 1024Dimension color histogram on the HSV color space. The
other one is the SIFT feature with the bags of words model
and 1000 visual words in the codebook.
We generate the top k similar images of an image by computing the distance of visual feature vectors. There are various visual distance measures and we arbitrarily use the Pearson correlation distance in these experiments. The visual
distance between image
ai and aj is defined as s(ai , aj ) =
qP
P
P
0
0
0
0
0
2
2
(
(x))/
(x)
∗
H
(H
j
i
y Hj (y) ), Hi (x) =
y Hi (y) ) ∗ (
x
P
Hi (x) − y Hi (y)/N , where Hi and Hj are visual feature
vectors. N is the size of the visual feature vector.
We also use a textual based image retrieval approach which
searches textual related images to the query image. The
textual information in the dataset is social tags. We use
the tag list of an image as its textual feature vector, and
generate the top k relevant images of an image by computing the cosine distance of textual feature vectors. The
textual distance between
image ai and aj is defined as,
p
t(ai , aj ) = |Ti ∩ Tj |/ |Ti | ∗ |Tj |, where Ti and Tj are textual feature vectors, and | · | is the number of tags. The
images without textual information have no related images.
In our experiments, we first use one of the given image
retrieval methods F to generate top k (k=50) image search
results which are regarded as “original” ranking results. After that, we construct the information network Gk and rank
these top k image results with our approach using the properties of Gk . The new results are regarded as “betweenness”
and “closeness” ranking results respectively.
To evaluate the performance of the ranking results based
on different ranking options, we assume that users only select the images from the top r (r ≤ k) images in the search
results in their interactive image search sessions. We respectively construct new information network with the top r images in the ranking results for each ranking option. After
that, on one hand, we use the average shortest path length
(ASPL) in these new information networks as the evaluation
metric. This metric reflects ideal multi-round global performance of an image retrieval method by using all rounds of
user interactions in a search session and considering the images in the whole data collection, though not all start and
target image pairs included in this evaluation metric are
meaningful enough. Note that when r = k, the performance
of different ranking options are same because the nodes and
edges of the information network are same.

869

On the other hand, we also evaluate the average diversity
(AD) in the single-round image search results. The diversities of multi-round image search results can be computed
by averaging the single-round diversities of images on the
paths. Higher diversity means that it can provide more diverse candidates in a limited number of top search results
and thus assist users to reach the targets easier.

4.2

provide reasonable paths. For these start and target images, the possible path of our approach may only contain
images with concepts of “pet” or “animal”. The path of the
original ranking results may be not reasonable for user selection because a “dog” image is connected with a “boat” image
through the concepts in the background. In this example, a
user may tend to use the path provided by our results.
Furthermore, there are some pairs of start and target
image that have no path in the information network constructed by the top r ranking results. In such case, after
increasing the value of r and k, these pairs can finally have
paths. If the path is very long, it means that the target
image is difficult to reach from the start image by the given
image retrieval method.

Experimental Results

Table 1: Comparison of Average Shortest Path
Length (ASPL) and Average Diversity (AD) between Original Ranking Results of Image Retrieval
Methods and Reachability based Ranking Results
ASPL
AD
Ranking
Method
top r
top r
Option
10
25
10
25
HSV
Original
12.73 7.25 0.2129 0.2541
Betweenness 8.11 6.14 0.2795 0.2854
Closeness
10.03 6.26 0.3048 0.2991
SIFT
Original
11.21 6.68 0.4264 0.4623
Betweenness 6.35 5.45 0.4918 0.4890
Closeness
7.96 5.63 0.5311 0.5166
Text
Original
10.30 5.37 0.2513 0.3250
Betweenness 6.30 4.65 0.4322 0.4275
Closeness
9.30 4.98 0.3648 0.3861

Figure 2: Sample Results

5.
Table 1 lists the experimental results. We respectively
evaluate the performance on r = 10 and r = 25. The results
on metric ASPL illustrate that our ranking approach based
on different centrality measures have smaller ASPL than the
original ranking results, which means our approach can assist users to reach the targets more quickly and with fewer
rounds of interactions in ideal. In addition, the ASPL based
on closeness centrality is higher than that based on betweenness centrality. It is because closeness centrality allows users
to select non-shortest paths between the start and the target images. Note that an ASPL with value l does not mean
that a user needs l-round interactions to reach a reasonable
target. All images on a path can be reasonable targets.
The results on metric AD in Table 1 illustrate that our
ranking approach can generate results with higher diversities
and thus can accelerate the processes of reaching the targets
in search sessions.
Figure 2 shows the shortest paths between a pair of start
and target images based on different ranking options. It
uses the textual based method and a user is assumed to be
enjoying various “pet” images. The start image is a “dog”
image and the target image is a “cat” image. Such a pair of
start and target concepts is reasonable while a user is viewing “dog” images and changes his interest to “cat” images.
The start concepts and target concepts can be more different. For example, the example used in [5] for navigation in
entity information network of an information seeker is from
“Dik-dik” to “Albert Einstein” on Wikipedia pages.
Because betweenness centrality indicates the property associated with the shortest path between start and target
images, we use it as the sample here. In this example, our
ranking approach uses fewer steps to reach the targets. Because the dog and cat in some images of this example are
very small, we mark them in the figure with yellow circles.
This example also shows that our approach is possible to

CONCLUSION

In this paper, we propose a new kind of ranking option by
ranking the images according to their reachability to potential targets. We model the image search behavior with user
interaction as navigation on an image information network.
We use the properties of this network for reachability based
ranking. This ranking approach provides ideal and general
results without considering specific user intentions. In future
work, we will focus on predicting personalized targets.

6.

REFERENCES

[1] R. Datta, D. Joshi, J. Li, and J.Z. Wang. Image
retrieval: Ideas, influences, and trends of the new age.
ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 40(2):1–60, 2008.
[2] Y. Rui, T.S. Huang, M. Ortega, and S. Mehrotra.
Relevance feedback: a power tool for interactive
content-based image retrieval. IEEE Trans. on CSVT,
8(5):644–655, 1998.
[3] K. Porkaew, S. Mehrotra, and M. Ortega. Query
reformulation for content based multimedia retrieval
in MARS. In ICMCS’99, pp. 747-751, 1999.
[4] X.O. Tang, K. Liu, J.Y. Cui, F. Wen, X.G. Wang.
IntentSearch: Capturing User Intention for One-Click
Internet Image Search. IEEE Trans. on PAMI,
34(7):1342–1353, 2012.
[5] R. West and J. Leskovec. Human wayfinding in
information networks. In WWW’12, pp.619–628, 2012.
[6] M. Riondato and E.M. Kornaropoulos. Fast
approximation of betweenness centrality through
sampling. In WSDM’14, pp.413-422, 2014.
[7] M. Bastian, S. Heymann, and M. Jacomy. Gephi: an
open source software for exploring and manipulating
networks. In ICWSM’09, 2009.
[8] M.J. Huiskes and M.S. Lew. The MIR Flickr Retrieval
Evaluation. In MIR’08, pp.39–43, 2008.

870

