A Time-aware Random Walk Model for Finding Important
Documents in Web Archives
Tu Ngoc Nguyen, Nattiya Kanhabua, Claudia Niederée and Xiaofei Zhu
L3S Research Center / Leibniz Universität Hannover, Germany

{tunguyen, kanhabua, niederee, zhu}@L3S.de
ABSTRACT

about such processes are of great benefit for expert users
such as journalists, economists, or historians. However, support for navigational search as it is, for example, offered by
the Wayback machine1 , is not sufficient for tapping the full
potential of web archives. Instead, search results should
provide a good coverage of the query topic over time for enabling exploration of the topic and its evolution. Therefore,
content relevance is not the only driver: time relevance and
impact are other key factors. Further aspects, which make
web archive search very different from web search are the
high redundancy (pages of near-identical content are crawled
all over again) and the special role that time/crawling time
is playing in the web archive structure.
In this paper, we tackle the problem of discovering important documents along the time-span of the web archives by a
ranking approach. The intuition is that the impact/authority
of a document in the web archives with regards to a query
is strongly influenced by time. Hence, the temporal authority of a document should be accumulated over a surrounding
time window (instead of considering only one or all temporal
snapshots).
Temporal link analysis for web search improvement has
been studied in previous work [1, 4, 9, 10]. Their common
goal is to improve state-of-the-art link-based algorithms (i.e.,
PageRank [8]) in favoring new web pages, instead of old,
stale pages (that often ranked high due to its accumulated
in-links). The most advanced approach in this direction is
described in [4], where they track the authority of a page
over multiple historical (past) web snapshots. This allows
the incorporation of web freshness into authority propagation, and hence, boosts the authority of fresh (new) page
at the querying time. In estimating the temporal authority
along the time dimension, we adapt their strategy by propagating the authority of past and future snapshots. This
backward propagation (from future snapshots) accounts for
the ‘lagging’ time a new document needs to gather in-links.
For example, a document about health care reform issued in
March, 2010 is more relevant with the time point than April,
2010, where it has more number of in-links.
Graph-based diversity for ranking based on random walk
are addressed in [2, 5, 11]. The first two utilized a greedy
algorithm in transforming a picked node into an absorbing
state. This punishes neighboring nodes but the random walk
still lingers at away nodes, hence increases diversity. Mei et
al. [5] introduce a vertex- reinforcement base on the intuition that nodes are visited many times tend to be more
likely to be re-visited. This reinforcement on the transition

Due to their first-hand, diverse and evolution-aware reflection of nearly all areas of life, web archives are emerging as
gold-mines for content analytics of many sorts. However,
supporting search, which goes beyond navigational search
via URLs, is a very challenging task in these unique structures with huge, redundant and noisy temporal content.
In this paper, we address the search needs of expert users
such as journalists, economists or historians for discovering
a topic in time: Given a query, the top-k returned results
should give the best representative documents that cover
most interesting time-periods for the topic. For this purpose, we propose a novel random walk-based model that
integrates relevance, temporal authority, diversity and time
in a unified framework. Preliminary experimental results on
a large-scale, real-world web archival collection shows that
our method significantly improves the state-of-the-art algorithms (i.e., PageRank) in ranking temporal web pages.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information
Search and Retrieval—Retrieval models

General Terms
Algorithms, Experimentation, Performance

Keywords
Temporal Ranking, Web Archive, Authority, Diversity

1.

INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND

Web archives reflect nearly all types of social cultural, societal and everyday processes of our lives in the web as well
as the exponential growth and continuous change in content and structure of the world wide web. Therefore, web
archives from organizations such as the Internet Archive
have the potential of becoming invaluable gold-mines for
temporal content analytics of many kinds (e.g., politics and
social issues, economics or media). First hand evidences
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR’15, August 09 - 13, 2015, Santiago, Chile.
c 2015 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3621-5/15/08 ...$15.00.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2766462.2767832.

1

915

http://archive.org/web/

probability has a strong theoretical foundation, brings less
complexity and can be improved towards scalability in large
graphs.
For temporal ranking in the web archive, we are the first
ones to combine the problems of relevance, temporal authority, diversity and time in a unified framework. In more
detail, we construct a temporal graph over the web archive.
Using time preference and relevance as priors, in Section 2.1,
we propose a novel random walk model on the temporal
graph. The model accounts for the in-link and natural time
lagging in the web archive in mining the temporal authority. We present two ways of injecting time preference in
Section 2.2. Further more, we introduce a novel diversity
mechanism that penalizes both neighbors in the same web
snapshots and across snapshots in Section 2.3. Our experiments are conducted on a large-scale, real-world web archival
dataset, which is further explained in Section 3.

2.
2.1

Figure 1: Time-travel web archive surfer. Solid lines indicate within-snapshot transitions, and dashed lines indicate
the across-snapshot teleporting

METHODOLOGY

do not consider the editorial behaviour of the page because
we focus on informational queries, where the content of a
document is nearly static over time. In order that, we take
into account the freshness linked with the age of a document
a at time ti , F(a, ti ), which is quantified as:

Temporal Ranking Model

In this work, we re-design the traditional PageRank (at
document/page level) to more precisely measure the temporal authority of the documents. We propose a new timeaware random surfer model, with the intuition that instead
of jumping to a random node with equal probability, this
traveler favors jumping to a node at a time period of interest.
Temporal Graph Model A temporal graph G consists
of multiple graphs at different time points, called graph
snapshots (snapshots for short). A snapshot G is a directed
graph with time annotation, Gt = (Vt , Et , t), with t ∈ T ,
Vt ∈ V and Et ∈ E. A vertex v ∈ V can belong to multiple
snapshots {Vt }. A vertex v ∈ Vti is connected with v ∈ Vtj

by an inter-link vti , vtj ∈ I. In the web archive context,
each vertex v in a graph snapshot is a revision of a document
d, identified by an unique URL. The vertex is time-stamped
by the crawling time. The edge between two vertices is the
hyper-link between two revisions. It is time-stamped as the
time of the source vertex.
Temporal Random Surfer Model We describe a ‘time
travel random surfer model’, which redefines how an web
archive searcher (so-called time traveler ) surfs in the web
archive. The ‘time travel random surfer model’ is initiated
by the ‘random surfer model’, which explains underlying
PageRank [8]. The original model describes the surfing behavior of a web surfer that after following the link structure
starting from a page for several steps and then jump to a
random page. However, this surfer model does not wellcaptured the temporal nature of a longitudinal web archive.
Surfing in the web archive, we assume that a user prefers
search results from interesting time points. Hence, the surfing behaviour of a time traveler should be adapted to incorporate this temporally important aspect.
In this work, we model a time-travel surfing as in moves
that consist of two distinct steps (i.e., non-temporal and
temporal, as illustrated in Figure 1). At each move, a traveler starts with a non-temporal step. A searcher chooses to
either follow the out-links of a page or jump to a remote
page. In order to achieve the precise temporal authority of
a page at a time point, we employ the fresh favoring mechanism as in [4], so that old pages are degraded. A traveler in
our model prefers a new/fresh page. As contrast to [4], we

F(a, ti ) = e−β1 (ti −T (a))

(1)

where T denotes the first time a page appears in the collection. In the second (temporal) step, a traveler jumps to a
snapshot of the page at different time points. To capture the
temporal authority, we model the authority propagation flow
among nodes at nearby time points. Here, we introduce two
kinds of propagations: forward- (authority is propagated by
past snapshots) and backward- (authority is propagated by
future snapshots). The propagation is modeled in a decay
fashion, and hence, in a time window with length controlled
by a decay parameter. This authority propagation is different from [4] in the sense that, it helps capturing the precise
temporal authority of a document at a given time point (instead of using for smoothing purpose). We model the length
of the temporal propagation as controlled by the decay parameter β2 (further explained in Section 2.2), that we model
as a global parameter in this work.

2.2

Time-sensitive PageRank

In this section, we explain two novel methods to inject
time preference into the PageRank: (1) the jumping probability at the 1st step, so that the jumping scope is not
restricted to within current snapshot but other snapshots
and (2) via the transition probability between snapshots, at
the 2nd step.
In the normal case where no preferences are defined, the
vector ~v which presents the jumping probability from node
a to all the nodes N in the temporal graph is uniformly
distributed (= [ N1 ]N × 1). However, different from this ordinary behavior, we present a query-dependent, time-aware
vector ~vtemp over the temporal graph as follows:
Time-aware Teleportation Instead of limiting the jumping scope in within a web snapshot, the traveler in this case
can jump to any snapshot with a time preference. The probability of jumping from q to p at time ti , Pti (p|q, Jump), is
dependent on the preference score of time ti , I(ti ). The

916

probability that a traveler reaches the page p at snapshot ti
can be written as2 :
X

πp,i =

X

Pti |tj (p)

tj ∈Ti

The vertex reinforcement is applied within each snapshot, so
that the within-snapshot neighbors of a popular node (visited many times) are penalized. For the authority propagation across time snapshots, however, this mechanism cannot
be integrated directly. Instead, we follow a voting propagation mechanism. For every step, we check for the node snapshot with maximum number of visits over the propagation
time window, and only this node snapshot got propagated
from others. The other nodes receive no propagation from
other nodes. Hence, this approach allows a partial acrosssnapshot penalty and helps the time-based diversity.

Ptj (F ollow|q)Ptj (p|q, F ollow)

q:q→p|tj

+

X

P (Jump|q)I(ti )

∀q

(2)

Time-aware Transition Probability For this second
type of embedding time preference into the model, we modify the transition probability across time snapshots. Intuitively, a snapshot at time ti with high time preference will
have higher transition probability. In this case, the jumping
scope is restricted within the time snapshot. The probability that a traveler reaches the page p at snapshot ti can be
written as:
X
πp,i =

Pti |tj (p)

tj ∈Si

X

+

X

Pti |tj (p)

tj ∈Si

X

Figure 2: Reinforced/dynamic propagation over a time
window. There is only one node gets all the propagations.

Ptj (F ollow|q)Ptj (p|q, F ollow)

q:q→p|tj

X

In a similar fashion to [5], the time-variant transition probability from q to p at step T (of the random walk) within a
time snapshot ti is defined as:

Ptj (Jump|q)Ptj (p|q, Jump)

q|tj

Pti |tj (p)

tj ∈Si

=


· (1 − α)

X
q:q→p|tj

Ftj (p, q) · πq,j

PtTi (p, q) = (1 − α) · s(ptj ) + α ·


X πq,j

+α
Ntj

where Si is the set of snapshots which can directly distribute
authority to ti within one step. Even though presenting a
similar generalization of the propagation model to us, the results in [4] indicate that the decay propagation is not most
suitable for their task (normal web ranking). In our case,
instead this transition probability (propagation) is strongly
time-influenced. A node most propagates its authority to
the time of interest (to help the time-aware ranking) that
most near its time snapshot. The transition probability
Pti |tj (p) is derived from the interestingness measure of the
two time points and is calculated as:



calculated as Equation 4
p = argmax∀ti ∈Wt NtTi (p),
Pti |tj (p) =
j


0

(5)

if
otherwise.
(6)

where Wtj is the time window of tj , such that ∀ti ∈ Wtj ,
w(ti , tj ) > 0.

3.

EXPERIMENTS

In this section, we evaluate the performances of 5 different
methods: temp-BM25, temp-PageRank3 (baseline), our approach with time-aware teleportation (ours), our approach
with vertex-reinforcement random walk (ours+div) and our
approach with time-aware vertex-reinforcement random walk
(ours+tempdiv).

(4)

where w(ti , tj ) = eβ2 |ti −tj | . Hence the propagation scope is
restricted to a time window W with the size (also size of S)
is controlled by β2 . Within the time window W, one with
high time preference will be more likely to be propagated.

2.3

DtTi (p)

where NtTi (q) is the number of visits to q at step T . DtTi (p) =
P
0
T
q∈ti Pti (p, q)Nti (q). The cross snapshot- transition probability Pti |tj (p) at step T is:

q|tj

I(tj )
· w(ti , tj )
Pti |tj (p) = P
∀tk I(tk )

Pt0i (p, q) · NtTi (q)

Time-based Diversity in Temporal Graph

3.1

In this section, we target another issue of the ranking
problem, the time-based diversification of the top-k results.
Reinforcement in Random Walk
Mei et al. [5] introduce the integration of the vertex-reinforced
random walk (VRRW) into the conventional PageRank to
address the diversity ranking in graphs. Their intuition follows the ‘rich gets richer’ phenomenon, which specifically,
the node that has been visited many times will have higher
probability to be revisited again. Hence, the transition probability in the Markov random walk (to a state from others)
is reinforced by the number of previous visits to that state.
Our time-based diversity model follows the same intuition.
2

One can introduce a parameter α in the formula so that
P
p πp,i = 1. However, to simplify the problem, we omit the
parameter.

917

Experiment settings

Dataset We utilize a corpus of archival web pages in .gov
domain collected by the Internet Archive from January 1995
to September 2013. The corpus contains over 900 million of
text captures and over 58.8 billion temporal links. In order
to shrink down the huge collection to extract a subset/subgraph of interest, we follow the idea of recent work that
exploiting the value of anchor text. First, we achieve over
60 related long-term controversial political topics from the
debate website4 . We then look into the document linking
graph and extract the links with anchor text reflecting any
of the topics (both lexicographically and semantically). We
3
To incorporate temporal prior, we apply PageRank and BM25
at each time snapshot and then multiply them with the corresponding time preference score.
4
http://www.debate.org/big-issues/

(p < 0.05) at k = 3 and k = 5. It is empirically found
that, our propagation method helps identifying the temporal authority with regards to the relevant time more precisely. For example, given the query electoral college and a
time period February 2009, a document issued in September
2008 has a high score for the traditional PageRank. However, our propagation accounts for both freshness and lagging ranks another document issued in February 2009 higher
(that is more time relevant). The good performance of our
approach shows that we capture better the temporal authority of documents with regards to the time preference.
Our temporal diversity method also shows that it diversifies time effectively. The results for content-based subtopic
diversity measurement also indicate a good performance of
our method. Ours+tempdiv best performs (significant with
p < 0.05) for all cases. This rather shows the effectiveness
of our time-aware diversity approach.

Figure 3: Performance of time-based subtopic diversity.

4.

Figure 4: Performance of content-based subtopic diversity.

then captured the source and destination web pages of these
links and treat them as the document seeds. We further
capture the in-pages pointing to source pages and out-pages
(which the destinations point to) to achieve a substantially
large collection of over 100 million document revisions (approx. 40 million unique documents). We then picked 20
controversial/informational queries to conduct the experiment.
Ground Truth and Metrics Since there is no publicly
available gold standard for our work, we rely on manual
annotation for the 20 queries. For each document, we asked
human experts, whether it is relevant to (1) one of the timepoints and (2) any of the content-based subtopics. The scale
for time is binary, whereas to account for authority, we use
a scale from 0 (not related) to 4 (highly relevant) for the
subtopic relevance judgment. A document with score larger
than 2 is considered as relevant. For evaluation, follow the
adopted setting of recent TREC web tracks (diversity task)
as presented in [6], we use a generalization of a well-known
result diversification metric (that accounts for both diversity
and relevance), α-nDCG [3] (so that it takes into account
the subtopic weights). We consider two different subtopic
dimensions, (1) time - with associated weight mined from
the anchor-text distribution and (2) subtopics mined from
content - equally weighted.
Priors and Parameter Tuning For the temporal prior,
we mined from the anchor text frequency distribution (to
mimic the query logs, following [7]). For the relevance prior,
we utilize the scores from the BM25 retrieval model. For the
random walk parameters, we set the jumping probability to
be the default 0.15. All decay parameters are set to 0.4. All
algorithms are run over Apache Giraph5 .

3.2

European Commission for the ERC Advanced Grant ALEXANDRIA under grant No. 339233 and the FP7 project ForgetIT
under grant No. 600826. We thank the Internet Archive and
Altiscale for providing access to the archived data.

References
[1] K. Berberich, M. Vazirgiannis, and G. Weikum. Time-aware
authority ranking. Internet Mathematics, 2(3):301–332, 2005.
[2] X.-Q. Cheng, P. Du, J. Guo, X. Zhu, and Y. Chen. Ranking on
data manifold with sink points. Knowledge and Data Engineering, IEEE Transactions on, 25(1):177–191, 2013.
[3] C. L. Clarke, M. Kolla, G. V. Cormack, O. Vechtomova,
A. Ashkan, S. Büttcher, and I. MacKinnon. Novelty and diversity in information retrieval evaluation. In Proceedings of
SIGIR’2008, pages 659–666.
[4] N. Dai and B. D. Davison. Freshness matters: in flowers, food,
and web authority. In Proceedings SIGIR’2010, pages 114–121.
[5] Q. Mei, J. Guo, and D. Radev. Divrank: the interplay of prestige and diversity in information networks. In Proceedings of
SIGKDD’2010, pages 1009–1018.
[6] T. N. Nguyen and N. Kanhabua. Leveraging dynamic query
subtopics for time-aware search result diversification. In Proceedings of ECIR’2014, pages 222–234.
[7] T. N. Nguyen, N. Kanhabua, W. Nejdl, and C. Niederée. Mining
relevant time for query subtopics in web archives. In Proceedings
of WWW’2015 companion, pages 1357–1362.
[8] L. Page, S. Brin, R. Motwani, and T. Winograd. The pagerank
citation ranking: Bringing order to the web. 1999.
[9] L. Yang, L. Qi, Y.-P. Zhao, B. Gao, and T.-Y. Liu. Link analysis
using time series of web graphs. In Proceedings of CIKM’2007,
pages 1011–1014.
[10] P. S. Yu, X. Li, and B. Liu. On the temporal dimension of search.
In Proceedings of WWW’2004, pages 448–449.
[11] X. Zhu, A. B. Goldberg, J. Van Gael, and D. Andrzejewski. Improving diversity in ranking using absorbing random walks. In
Proceedings of HLT-NAACL’2007, pages 97–104.

Experiment results

Figures 3 and 4 show the time and subtopic diversification
results of the compared models respectively. For the time
diversity, our models outperform the baseline significantly
5

CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we have studied the problem of finding important document in the web archive and address it in a
unified framework that integrates relevance, temporal authority, diversity and time together. In detail, we proposed
a novel random walk model incorporating time and the link
structure of the web archive. Our model is shown to outperform PageRank for both relevance and diversity tasks. For
future work, we would like to investigate the application of
the novel model on different open challenges of web archive,
i.e., time-aware summarization. Scalability issues will also
be another target.
Acknowledgments The work was partially funded by the

http://giraph.apache.org/

918

