Location-Aware Model for News Events in Social Media
Mauricio Quezada, Vanessa Peña-Araya, and Barbara Poblete
PRISMA Research Group
Department of Computer Science
University of Chile, Santiago, Chile

{mquezada, vpena, bpoblete}@dcc.uchile.cl
ABSTRACT

1.

Nowadays, social media services are being used extensively
as news sources and for spreading information on real-world
events. Several studies have focused on detecting those
events and locating them geographically. However, in order
to study real-world events, for example, finding relationships
between locations or detecting high impact events based on
their coverage, we need more suitable models to represent
events. In this work we propose a simple model to represent
real-world news events using two sources of information: the
locations that are mentioned in the event (where the event
occurs), and the locations of users that discuss or comment
on it. We then characterize a country based on the amount
of events in which that country is mentioned and also participates on the event. We show some applications of the model:
we find clusters of news events based on the level of participation of countries, identifying global and impactful events
in certain areas. Also, we show groups of similar countries,
finding promising insights about their relationships. This
model can be useful at finding unsuspected relations among
countries based on the news coverage and country participation, identifying different levels of news coverage in the
world, and finding bias in international news sources.

Online Social Networks (OSN) such as Twitter1 , Facebook2 , and Sina Weibo3 have become important sources of
news. In particular, Twitter is nowadays a central part of
information spread, as one of its main functions is to pass
along information as news stories develop. When a breaking news event happens, Twitter users react to it by posting
messages about the subject and quickly broadcasting the
information to other users.
Twitter is an OSN and social media service that enables
users to post messages of 140 characters. These messages,
called tweets, can also include hyperlinks and can be geotagged with exact coordinates, depending on the location of
the user. Even if the location is not provided, it is possible
to infer an approximate location by analyzing the text of
the tweets, or the location included in the author’s profile
description.
Also, with the increasing amount of GPS-enabled devices,
OSN have enabled the ability of geotagging messages according to the location from they were posted. Even without these capabilities, users can assign a location to a message, or the location can be inferred from the message’s text,
etc. In particular, this allows researchers to study the interactions on OSN by looking at the spatial dimension. By
examining the geotagged messages, it is possible to study
information propagation, event detection, visualization of
trends, etc.
It is necessary to model events accordingly in order to
gain valuable insights about them. Placing the events in
a map is useful for understanding what is happenning and
where, but we need more suitable tools to study general
trends about news events (how it is happening) and the role
the geographical locations play in the propagation and impact of the events (why it is happening), especially on a large
scale. For example, we would want to answer queries such
as: which news events and which countries where these news
events occurred are currently impacting Southeast Asia, or
which countries are being impacted by news events taking
place in Spain.
Our main goal is to find a representation of news events
that allows us to answer the following research questions:

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Information
filtering

General Terms
Design, Experimentation

Keywords
Event modeling; localized events; knowledge discovery

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on
servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR ’15, August 09 - 13, 2015, Santiago, Chile
Copyright is held by the authors. Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-3621-5/15/08 $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2766462.2767815.

INTRODUCTION

1. Can we identify groups of news that have similar properties in terms of the countries that they impact and
in terms of the places where they occur? What other
1

https://twitter.com
https://facebook.com
3
http://weibo.com
2

935

interesting insights can we gain from these relationships?

Our work does not focus on the event detection problem,
but rather on the event representation, to gain insight from
events, where it is not possible to do so in other models.

2. Which news is truly global in terms of the locations
impacted by its occurrence?

3.

3. Which news is causing high impact to certain locations, in terms of the reactions of the users from these
locations?
4. How biased are certain news sources according to the
locations covered in news reports?
We propose a model for news events disseminated in OSN
streams that considers the geographical location information
of an event. This information comes from two sources: the
locations of places where the event occurs, and the locations
of users that participate in the event in the social network.
Our model is a simple way to represent news events based
on the location data extracted from the social media messages related to them. With this representation in mind, we
show that we can find relationships between sources of information and the impacted locations, in terms of the messages
posted in those locations. This can be useful in finding relations of causality between news events, identifying different
levels of news coverage in the world (finding biases or the
influence of news media in certain places), tracking news
events in social media streams, and discovering unsuspected
relationships among countries or conflicts, etc.
We show some applications of the model using a dataset
of news events collected from Twitter. We show clusters of
locations where events took place and users participate in
them, illustrating that we can find high impact events based
on news coverage, or to study the bias or the influence of a
certain news source using these locations. Also, we compare
some selected countries based on the events that took place
in these locations, discovering relationships between countries. In terms of Information Retrieval applications, with
this kind of model it would be possible to find events similar
to a given event, to retrieve events based on certain given
features, or to rank events and countries based on the level
of participation of users on OSN.

2.

LOCATION-AWARE EVENT MODEL

We propose a novel and simple way to represent an event
based on the location data extracted from social media messages that cover the topic. We identify two dimensions of
the problem: first, the countries where the news originated
(protagonist countries), and secondly, the countries from
where users talk about the news (participating countries).
Using both concepts we define a matrix that characterizes
the locations based on the level of protagonism and participation of them in the events. We can represent an event
by the protagonist countries, the participating countries, or
both.
Let E = {e1 , e2 , . . . , eN } be a set of events. Each news
event e is defined as a tuple e = (Cprotagonist , Cparticipating ),
where Cprotagonist is the set of protagonist countries and
Cparticipating is the set of participating countries in the event.
By also having the total amount of messages posted from
each participating country, Cparticipating can be defined as
the set of pairs (c, total messagesc ), storing the total message information for country c.
We now define a matrix M which we call protagonismparticipation matrix. Each cell Mij contains the amount of
events from E which contain the country ci as a protagonist country and the country cj as a participation country,
1 ≤ i, j ≤ total countries. Each row of the matrix is called
protagonism-participation vector, vi , which characterizes a
particular country ci . By also having the amount of messages associated with each participating country in an event,
we can extend the definition of the matrix by weighting each
cell by the average amount (or any other suitable function)
of messages posted from country cj in all the corresponding events. We leave this extension to the matrix as future
work.
Formally, each cell of the matrix is defined as follows:
Mij = {e ∈ E | ci ∈ Cprotagonist ∧ cj ∈ Cparticipating }
And the protagonism-participation vector vi is defined as
follows:

RELATED WORK

vi = (v1 , v2 , . . . , vtotal countries ),

As social networks have grown in popularity, several research studies have focused on event detection and characterization in social media streams, in particular, on detecting and geotagging events. For example, localized [9, 1, 8],
global [7], or critical [4, 5] events. However, they do not
place much attention on the representation of events in order to perform more in-depth studies of the events identified.
We did not find many studies related to event modeling or
event representation from social media messages.
Regarding models of social media data, in the work of Kamath et al. [3], the authors carried out a large-scale study of
the spatio-temporal dynamics of Twitter hashtags (a hashtag is a user-generated string prefixed by # that users can
include in a tweet as a way to associate it with an event or to
a topic). They represented a hashtag as a tuple consisting in
the location coordinates of the hashtag. A simple model is
used to find interesting insights about social media memes.
However, these memes may not necessarily correspond to
real-world events.

where vj is the the total amount of events which have
country ci as protagonist country and country cj as participation country, 1 ≤ j ≤ total countries.
The idea behind the model is that we represent a country
c by the level of participation that other countries have on
the events that took place in c. With this, we can find
relationships between countries. Also, we consider an event
as the tuple consisting on the protagonist and participating
countries, so we can not only locate events in a map, but
also we can find the countries which participate in the event.
For example, to assess the impact of events based on their
coverage.

4.

EXPLORATORY STUDY

Using a dataset of news events collected from Twitter, we
computed the event representation described in the previous
section, and the protagonism-participation matrix. We show
that we can identify global and impactful events in terms of

936

(a) Indonesia and the United (b) United States, Indonesia and
States.
United Kingdom.

(d) United States, Indonesia and
United Kingdom.

(c) Indonesia.

Figure 1: Clusters of participation countries across all events. Each map shows one cluster of participation countries. The
size of a bubble in a country is proportional to the square root of the average amount of tweets posted from that country of
all the events. The caption in each subfigure contains the name or names of the most prominent countries in each cluster.

their coverage using cluster analysis, and that we can find
similar countries based on the countries that participate in
the news that mention the similar ones, using Euclidean
distance between protagonism-participation vectors.

4.1

Germany
Ukraine
Russia
Israel
Palestine

Germany

Ukraine

Russia

Israel

4.7648
13.1369
12.8379
7.5124
7.0845

12.4971
12.0232
7.4612
6.8949

4.4605
11.6408
12.9251

11.4627
12.8307

3.4988

Dataset Description
Table 1:
Euclidean distance between protagonismparticipation vectors corresponding to selected countries.
Lower value means higher similarity.

We used a dataset of approximately 18,000 news events
collected from Twitter dating from August 2013 until May
2014. Each event consists of a set of tweets describing or
commenting the occurrence. Using manually selected verified Twitter news accounts (such as CNN, BBC, AP, etc.),
we collected news headlines, identified recurring words in the
headlines, and then used these words to perform searches in
Twitter to retrieve tweets that cover each news, using the
Twitter REST API [2]. An observation worth noting is that
most of the news accounts correspond to American or English sources, so the dataset is biased to news events from
these sources.
We employed an open source library for geotagging text,
CLAVIN [6] (Cartographic Location And Vicinity INdexer)
to identify locations from the tweets. We geotagged each
tweet alone by looking at its text and its author’s information (discarding the messages to which it was not possible to
associate with a location), yielding the participating countries for every event. On the other hand, we considered the
text of all the tweets belonging to an event as a single document, and then we identified the protagonist countries for
that event, by choosing the most mentioned locations in the
tweets.

4.2

Brazil

4.3

Protagonism-Participation Clusters

Using the protagonism-participation vectors, we find similar groups of countries through hierarchical cluster analysis. We compare countries using a simple visual approach by
representing the countries by their corresponding protagonismparticipation vectors as heatmaps. In this article we only
illustrate selected examples from the resulting clustering solution.
Table 1 shows the computed Euclidean distance between
the protagonism-participation vectors corresponding to Brazil,
Germany, Ukraine, Russia, Israel and Palestine, based on
the news events in the dataset. The resulting pairs of similar countries can be explained by the recurring news events
related to them (e.g., the conflict in Ukraine, or the soccer
match between Germany and Brazil in the 2014 FIFA World
Cup).
Figures 2a, 2b, and 2c show heatmaps of pairs of countries in the same cluster: Russia and Ukraine, Israel and
Palestine, and Germany and Brazil, while Figure 2d shows
two dissimilar countries, the United States and the United
Kingdom. It can be seen that the pairs of heatmaps are visually similar, and different from the other pairs (also documented in Table 1 using Euclidean distance). Russia and
Ukraine share the most similar heatmaps, followed by Israel
and Palestine. This can be explained by the recurring events
concerning these countries. The case of Germany and Brazil
can be explained by the events triggered in the 2014 FIFA
World Cup. The similarity between the vectors corresponding to Germany and Brazil is not as low compared to the
other pairs (as shown in Table 1), and this could be reflecting
the fact that the corresponding news events happened in a
short time interval (days), as opposed to the events concerning the other countries (months). Finally, the last heatmap
(Figure 2d) shows two dissimilar countries, illustrating that
the method is useful to find relationships between countries
based on the news events that took place in these locations.
This approach shows that the countries share properties
related to the news events that happened in these locations.

Participation Clusters

We first performed a cluster analysis of the participating countries of the events. Recall that the participating
countries are the countries from where users post messages
about the event. Using the number of tweets as the amount
of messages for each country, we used the k-means clustering
algorithm with parameter k = 4 to identify clusters of vectors representing the most common participating countries
across the events. Figure 1 shows the clusters in maps with
the four participation clusters. Figure 1a shows a higher coverage in Indonesia, followed by the United States, while Figure 1b shows coverage world-wide, notoriously in the United
States, the United Kingdom (recall that most of the news
sources are from these locations), and Indonesia. Figure 1c
shows participation only from Indonesia, while Figure 1d is
similar to Figure 1b, but with lesser participation from the
United States. We consider a higher level of coverage as the
result of high impact news to these locations, allowing us to
identify critical events on the social network.

937

kind of queries that can be done to the model in terms of a
event search engine system. In particular, by clustering participation countries we can find biases of news sources by
analyzing only news of selected sources. Also, by comparing
different countries using protagonism-participation vectors
we can find unsuspected relationships based on several news
events involving these countries. We expect to extend these
analyses to show even more promising results.

100

200

Russia

Ukraine
0

Frequency

Color Key

−4

0

2

4

Participation value

Countries

(a) Russia and Ukraine
Israel

100 200

6.
Palestine

0

Frequency

Color Key

−6

−2

2

6

Participation value

Countries

(b) Israel and Palestine

7.

100

200

Germany

Brazil

0

Frequency

Color Key

−5

0

5

Participation value

Countries

(c) Germany and Brazil
United
States

100
40

United
Kingdom

0

Frequency

Color Key

−4 −2

0

2

4

Participation value

Countries

(d) United States and United Kingdom

Figure 2: Heatmaps comparing protagonism-participation
vectors between pairs of selected countries. The x-axis of the
heatmap corresponds to the countries (country names were
omitted for clarity), and the color (participation value) corresponds to the scaled (zero mean and unit variance) amount
of events in which the countries participate in the events in
which the given country is protagonist.

Also, it is possible to recognize the most participating countries by looking at the heatmap (country labels were removed from the figures for the sake of readability). We can
find unexpected relationships between countries using this
approach by just inspecting the resulting heatmaps.

5.

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

We proposed a simple model to represent events from social media, using the location information included in the
messages related to the events. Using two dimensions of the
problem (the locations where the event occurred and the
locations of users who participate in the event), we define
a matrix of the amount of events participating in a certain
country, characterizing countries based on the corresponding
events. We conducted a cluster analysis of the resulting vectors, showing that it is possible to find global and impactful
events based on the coverage of news, and relationships between countries based on their participation in news events,
using a visual approach.
Future work includes extending the model, considering the
level of participation of countries in the analysis, performing a large scale study of news events, and formalizing the

REFERENCES

[1] H. Abdelhaq, C. Sengstock, and M. Gertz. EvenTweet:
Online Localized Event Detection from Twitter.
Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 6(12):1326–1329,
Aug. 2013.
[2] T. Inc. Twitter Developers.
https://dev.twitter.com/. Accessed: 2015-01-30.
[3] K. Y. Kamath, J. Caverlee, K. Lee, and Z. Cheng.
Spatio-temporal Dynamics of Online Memes: A Study
of Geo-tagged Tweets. In Proceedings of the 22Nd
International Conference on World Wide Web, WWW
’13, pages 667–678, Republic and Canton of Geneva,
Switzerland, 2013. International World Wide Web
Conferences Steering Committee.
[4] A. MacEachren, A. Jaiswal, A. Robinson,
S. Pezanowski, A. Savelyev, P. Mitra, X. Zhang, and
J. Blanford. SensePlace2: GeoTwitter analytics support
for situational awareness. In 2011 IEEE Conference on
Visual Analytics Science and Technology (VAST),
pages 181–190, Oct 2011.
[5] T. Sakaki, M. Okazaki, and Y. Matsuo. Earthquake
Shakes Twitter Users: Real-time Event Detection by
Social Sensors. In Proceedings of the 19th International
Conference on World Wide Web, WWW ’10, pages
851–860, New York, NY, USA, 2010. ACM.
[6] B. Technologies. CLAVIN: Cartographic Location And
Vicinity INdexer.
http://clavin.bericotechnologies.com/, 2012–2013.
[7] B. E. Teitler, M. D. Lieberman, D. Panozzo,
J. Sankaranarayanan, H. Samet, and J. Sperling.
NewsStand: A New View on News. In Proceedings of
the 16th ACM SIGSPATIAL International Conference
on Advances in Geographic Information Systems, GIS
’08, pages 18:1–18:10, New York, NY, USA, 2008.
ACM.
[8] M. Walther and M. Kaisser. Geo-spatial Event
Detection in the Twitter Stream. In Advances in
Information Retrieval, pages 356–367. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, Jan. 2013.
[9] K. Watanabe, M. Ochi, M. Okabe, and R. Onai.
Jasmine: A Real-time Local-event Detection System
Based on Geolocation Information Propagated to
Microblogs. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM
International Conference on Information and
Knowledge Management, CIKM ’11, pages 2541–2544,
New York, NY, USA, 2011. ACM.
4

938

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors were partially supported by FONDECYT
Grant 11121511 and the Millennium Nucleus Center for Semantic Web Research4 under Grant NC120004.

http://ciws.cl

