Exploring Opportunities to Facilitate Serendipity in Search
M. Ataur Rahman

Max L. Wilson

School of Computer Science
University of Nottingham, UK

School of Computer Science
University of Nottingham, UK

shuvo.2007@gmail.com

max.wilson@nottingham.ac.uk

ABSTRACT

information is related to other interests, and 2) users can
identify valuable ways to connect new interesting information
to existing ideas.
The subjective and individual nature of serendipity, however, makes it very difficult to perform a controlled user
study to examine the impact of potentially serendipitous
user interface designs [13]: 1) Serendipitous searches must
be personally relevant, rather than from fictional tasks, 2)
users cannot be tasked with being serendipitous, and 3) the
discovery must also be personally valuable to make the connection. Consequently, rather than perform a controlled
laboratory experiment, we chose to deploy a live system,
named Feegli (Figure 1), which used real profile data from
users’ social media profiles. We asked participants to use
this as their primary search engine for 7 consequetive days,
which allowed us to explore the potential of encountering
serendipitous information in real contexts, and to investigate
participants’ experiences. This paper, therefore, describes a
lightweight naturalistic study of serendipity in web search
happening in the wild, insights into its nature and frequency
of it happening, and presents findings that support the notion
of micro-serendipity as a relevant model for web search.

Serendipitously discovering new information can bring many
benefits. Although we can design systems to highlight serendipitous information, serendipity cannot be easily orchestrated
and is thus hard to study. In this paper, we deployed a
working search engine that matched search results with Facebook ‘Like’ data, as a technology probe to examine naturally
occurring serendipitous discoveries. Search logs and diary
entries revealed the nature of these occasions in both leisure
and work contexts. The findings support the use of the
micro-serendipity model in search system design.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Relevance
Feedback; H.5.2 [User Interfaces]: Screen Design

Keywords
Serendipity; design; web search

1.

INTRODUCTION

Serendipity is a naturally occurring phenomenon in our
daily life, and has been proven to be valuable in many domains, including: medicine [18], business [8], creative thinking [2], as well as simply discovering new songs, good movies,
or even useful literature in a library. Fine & Deegan [12]
proposed the definition of serendipity as “the unique and
contingent mix of insight coupled with chance”, which sums
prior definitions by saying that a successful serendipitous
encounter requires both a prepared mind and an accidental
occurrence, to create a new insight.
To deliberately support serendipitous discoveries, research
has tried to deconstruct serendipity and identify design opportunities [1]. In this project, we suggest that user interests,
gathered from social media profiles, can be used in web search
to facilitate serendipity: 1) users might select partially relevant or less directly relevant search results, when seeing

Figure 1: Feegli highlights interest topics, gathered
from social media profiles, within search results

2.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR’15, August 09 - 13, 2015, Santiago, Chile.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-3621-5/15/08 ...$15.00.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2766462.2767783

RELATED WORK

The definition of serendipity is both unclear and disputed
[21, 15], with many researchers from various disciplines, having invested a great amount of time to study it [1, 5, 7, 9, 8,
16, 20]. Beyond simply encountering new information [11],
McCay-Peet & Toms [17] describe serendipity as an event
involving unexpectedness and a bi-sociation (mental connection). Conversely, Rubin et al. [20] described serendipity
as happening when 1) someone is prepared to see cues, 2)

939

an unexpected event occurs, and 3) a connection leads to a
fortuitous outcome.
Makri & Blandford [16] focused on the stages of connection,
realisation, and reflection that lead people to retrospectively
consider an event serendipitous. They also highlight that
most serendipitous events lead to a macro-serendipity tangible benefit, but that outcomes may also simply be an advancement of knowledge or understanding. Bogers & Bjorneborn
further focused on these as micro-serendipity events, which
were valuable even without clear tangible outcomes [5].
Andre et al [2] found that serendipity happens in web
search, where interesting and both partially relevant or
completely irrelevant search results have the potential for
serendipity. Letizia [14], a browser agent, analysed web
histories to recommend potentially interesting items to the
user, but aimed to recommend interesting pages rather than
highlight serendipity during normal web search. Similarly,
a system called Max [7] sent recommendations to users via
email after analysing two months of browsing data. Evaluations revealed that of 100 recommendations, 7 were found
to be valuable by users. Mitsikeru [4] did try to highlight
serendipitous results during search, but was not studied.

3.

number of matched interests, rather than estimating from the
snippets an amount of relevance. Consequently, as shown in
Figure 2, we designed a glyph (like [3]) to show up to three
matches with increasing intensity.
Each query and all presented search results were logged by
the system, including whether each result was highlighted as
being related to an interest. Consequently, we could tell from
the logs every potentially seredipitous result shown, for which
query and which interest, and where in the results list it was
presented. Further, each clicked result was logged by the
system. We also wanted to gather at-the-time judgements
about results, but with minimal interruption to their normal
search behavior. Consequently, each time, but only when,
a highlighted link was clicked on by a participant, Feegli
asked for the primary reason, as per Figure 3. A popup
was not shown if they did not click on a visible highlight, as
we did not want to artificially drive click through towards
such results. Further, we wanted to reduce the impact of the
popups on normal web search behaviour.

RESEARCH APPROACH

As serendipity cannot be simulated within a lab study,
we chose, like others [2], to use investigative methods to
explore naturally occuring examples of serendipity. Unlike
prior work, however, we built a custom working search engine, Feegli, which uses real social media data to highlight
results from normal searches that might also relate to one of
their interests. As found with the design of PIM tasks [10],
the individual nature of serendipity requires the use of real
personal data. This personal nature of serendipity, however,
precludes the creation of a comparable control group. Feegli,
as a technology probe, however, allowed us to study naturally occurring serendipitous occasions, using event logs and
insights from a longditudinal diary study.

3.1

Figure 2: Interest glyph shows number of interests

Feegli: a serendipitous search engine

Feegli was built using the Google Custom Search REST
API, and extracted interest data, as JSON files, from the
Facebook Graph API v1.0, as soon as they signed up using
their Facebook account. Further, participants added additional interests within a settings page for the Feegli system.
When users issued a query, the titles and snippets of the
search results were matched against the recorded Like data,
as exact strings and whole words. Partial matches were not
highlighted to avoid matches like ‘chaIR0 . Unlike typical
personalisation systems, we did not re-rank results based
on these interests. Instead, we highlighted results, leveraging the Restorff Isolation Effect [22] to provide a secondary
notion of potential relevance to ranking.
Several indicators of interest-relevance were considered
during the design phase: 1) interest matched, 2) intensity of
match, and 3) source of interest. After discussing several alternatives for such indicators during focus groups, the last of
these was not included in the design: social media icons were
presumed to be for sharing results on social networks, and
listing the source network provided less value than including
more results before the fold.
Matched interests were highlighted in place, with a yellow
background as seen in Figure 1, rather than being listed
separately. For intensity of match, we chose to indicate

Figure 3: Popup when a highlighted link was clicked

3.2

Participants - Daily Diary Entries

Study participants were recruited primarily from the Universty of Nottingham, UK. In total, 14 active facebook users,
with ‘Like’ data, were recruited. 9 were male, 5 were female.
12 already had an undergraduate degree. The study was
approved by the school’s ethics board and participants were
entered into a draw to win $100.
To learn about the potentially serendipitous events experienced by our participants, we asked them to fill in a daily
structured diary entry. The diary began with an open-ended
request to describe any serendipitous experiences they had
with Feegli during that day. Then, to support participants in
recalling events, participants were presented with illustrated
examples of their queries from that day. If a user clicked
on the highlighted serendipitous results, they were asked to
briefly explain the reason for clicking on it, and whether
their information goal was met or not. Alternatively, when a
user did not click on a highlighted result, they were asked
about whether they had seen it, considered clicking on it,

940

and so on. The daily diary was manually constructed by the
experimenter to include the daily examples, and sent to the
participants as a word document via email. Diary entries
were returned in the same way.

4.

results, for example: “I clicked it because the green icon
suggested that it had information I needed. After looking at
closer look I found out the paper has a lot details about designing a mobile communication system and it had information
on different generation of systems, which helped me. I found
serendipitous information [about] a comparison between different modulation techniques and it led to me change my
initial plan and gave me a series of new ideas about designing
the system.” (P3)
The intensity glyph helped P3 to experience serendipitous
information that was not among the top results; rather it
was positioned seventh. This indicates that Feegli helped
users to examine more results below the top, most frequently
clicked search results. Perhaps interestingly, however, the
user saw the glyph as being information they needed, rather
than being related to an interest. In this case, the result led
to a serious change in a work product, consistent with the
macro-view of serendipity.
Highlighted interest keywords also helped to draw attention, as P5 said “Well, the search engine showed me that
the link is of my interest and that’s why I clicked it. I was
randomly searching and looking for if there is a new brand in
clothing. It was the fifth link which highlighted Eva Mendes in
the text, I was curious to know more and later found out Eva
Mendes has a clothing line. It is difficult for me to answer
whether it met my information need or not however it was
nice to know that she has a clothing line. I would call this
serendipitous [...] I am not sure if it was valuable to me or
not but it definitely satisfied my curiosity.” (P5)
P5’s experience is a good example of a leisure search, but
also of micro-serendipity as the user was not sure if the new
information was fulfilling the original information goal but
it was serendipitous. This user may also have been more
open to serendipitous recommendations, given the undirected
nature of the query.

RESULTS

Each participant used Feegli as their primary search engine
between 25th April to 4th May, 2014. During these 11 days,
participants made 506 queries in total (avg. 46 queries
per day). Feegli returned 5380 search results during the
study. Of these, Feegli highlighted 445 (8%) to be potentially
serendipitous. Of these, 57 were clicked on by participants.
From the immediate popup feedback, 35.1% were chosen
because the text snippet made them seem relevant and 26.6%
because the link was the top result. 17.5% of results were
clicked because the user was specifically looking for the link.
22.8%, however, were clicked because Feegli highlighted them.
Commonly there are three types of queries people make
in search engines: Navigational (to get to a certain website),
Transactional (e.g. to buy, download, or retrieve something)
and Informational (to resolve an information need) [6]. 84%
of the queries were classified as informational; navigational
and transactional counted for 8% each. Of the 445 highlighted
results, 96% were shown for informational queries, and 4%
for navigational queries. Using proportion of queries as an
expected ratio, a chi-squared analysis showed that highlights
were significantly more likely to be shown for informational
queries (χ2 (2) = 49.826, p < 0.0001). Of the 57 highlighted
results clicked on by users, 98% were for informational queries.
Using proportion of highlights shown as an estimated ratio,
a chi-squared analysis showed that this was not significantly
more than would be expected. All of the occasions where
a user indicated that they clicked on the highlighted result
because of the potentially serendipitous content were from
these informational queries.
We also analysed the likely work or leisure focus of the
queries. 52% were related to work and 40% of the queries
are related to leisure search; 8% could not be easily classified.
64% of the highlighted, potentially serendipitous, results
were shown for work queries, while only 34% were for social.
Using proportion of classifiable queries submitted as an estimated ratio, a chi-squared analysis showed that significantly
more highlights were shown for work-oriented queries than
expected (χ2 (1) = 11.352, p < 0.001). Of the 57 actually
clicked, 60% were for work queries, while the remaining 40%
were for leisure queries. Using proportion of highlights shown
as an estimated ratio, a chi-squared analysis showed that
highlights were not significantly more likely to be clicked in
either work or leisure searches. The clicks that users said
were because of the potentially serendipitous highlight were
present in both groups. Perhaps surprisingly, these results
indicate that there is opportunity and reason to support
serendipitous discoveries in focused work tasks too, as well
as when more casually searching.

4.1

4.1.2

5.

DISCUSSION

Participants in our study described serendipitous encounters for both work and leisure related searches. Perhaps
surprisingly, work related queries drove serendipitous encounters more than for leisure search, despite both Facebook
and Feegli data showing the ‘interests’ of the users to be
more hobby and leisure related. It is possible that there is
less chance for leisure searches to only partially overlap with
leisure interests, where as work overlapping with leisure interests are more serendipitous. One observation from the data,

Diary Entries

Diary entires confirmed that users did experience serendipity while using Feegli, primarily for informational needs, but
also for both leisure and work searches.

4.1.1

Serendipitous Discovery vs. Directed Search

Highly directed search may reduce serendipity, as when a
user is focused on finding specific information, serendipitous
recommendations were ignored: “I did not click any of those
because I did not look that far down; I found my target website
within first few top results.” (P8)
Users also reported either looking at the type of link or
reading the snippet to understand what type of information
the link can offer: “I did not click because I was looking for
the information regarding old Robocop TV series and I went
to see at first IMDB link to check it and I found it from
there.” (P11). Instead, P11 utilized the highlight when goal
was vague in nature: “... first link was a Wikipedia link and
of second and third, only 3rd link was highlighted so I thought
it would may be important. I was looking for alternative
models for kuznet curve and after a while I found it...”.

Macro- vs Micro-serendipity

Following a recommendation, Feegli helped P3 to stumble
upon unexpected link and later helped to find serendipitous

941

is that people who inserted more data in the profile, and had
more Facebook Likes, received more serendipitous results
than others. Future work may wish to examine optimal levels
of interest modeling to support serendipity.

5.1

[2] P. André, J. Teevan, S. T. Dumais, et al. Discovery is
never by chance: designing for (un) serendipity. In
Proc. C&C, pages 305–314. ACM, 2009.
[3] S. S. Bateman, C. A. Gutwin, and G. I. McCalla.
Social navigation for loosely-coupled information
seeking in tightly-knit groups using webwear. In Proc.
ACM CSCW 2013, pages 955–966. ACM, 2013.
[4] R. Beale. Supporting serendipity: Using ambient
intelligence to augment user exploration for data
mining and web browsing. IJHCS, 65(5):421–433, 2007.
[5] T. Bogers and L. Björneborn. Micro-serendipity:
Meaningful coincidences in everyday life shared on
twitter. In Proc. iConference 2013, pages 196–208,
2013.
[6] A. Broder. A taxonomy of web search. In ACM Sigir
forum, volume 36, pages 3–10. ACM, 2002.
[7] J. Campos and A. d. Figueiredo. Searching the
unsearchable: Inducing serendipitous insights. In Proc.
ICCBR-2001, 2001.
[8] S. R. Clegg, S. Mendonça, et al. On serendipity and
organizing. European Management Journal,
28(5):319–330, 2010.
[9] E. B. Cooksey. Too important to be left to
chance-serendipity and the digital library. Science &
Technology Libraries, 25(1-2):23–32, 2004.
[10] D. Elsweiler and I. Ruthven. Towards task-based
personal information management evaluations. In Proc.
SIGIR ’07, pages 23–30. ACM, 2007.
[11] S. Erdelez. Information encountering: It’s more than
just bumping into information. ASIST Bulletin,
25(3):26–29, 1999.
[12] G. A. Fine and J. G. Deegan. Three principles of
serendip: insight, chance, and discovery in qualitative
research. IJQSE, 9(4):434–447, 1996.
[13] A. Foster and N. Ford. Serendipity and information
seeking: an empirical study. Journal of Documentation,
59(3):321–340, 2003.
[14] H. Lieberman et al. Letizia: An agent that assists web
browsing. IJCAI, 1995:924–929, 1995.
[15] S. Makri. Serendipity is not bullshit. In Proc.
EuroHCIR2014, 2014.
[16] S. Makri and A. Blandford. Coming across information
serendipitously–part 1: a process model. Journal of
Documentation, 68(5):684–705, 2012.
[17] L. McCay-Peet and E. G. Toms. The process of
serendipity in knowledge work. In Proc. IIiX 2010,
pages 377–382. ACM, 2010.
[18] M. A. Meyers. Science, creativity, and serendipity. AJR,
165(4):755–764, 1995.
[19] A. Muralidharan, Z. Gyongyi, and E. Chi. Social
annotations in web search. In Proc. ACM CHI 2012,
pages 1085–1094. ACM, 2012.
[20] V. L. Rubin, J. Burkell, and A. Quan-Haase. Facets of
serendipity in everyday chance encounters: a grounded
theory approach to blog analysis. Information Research,
16(3), 2011.
[21] A. Singh. Serendipity is bullshit. The Stanford Daily,
2014.
[22] H. Von Restorff. Uber die wirkung von
bereichsbildungen im spurenfeld. Psychologische
Forschung, 18(1):299–342, 1933.

Models and Theories of Serendipity

Our study data loosely supports both main perspectives on
serendipity: the unexpected encounter [17], and the purposeful awareness of cues [20]. In both cases, however, there was
element of ‘surprise’ in the process and also there was presence of ‘insight’ where user made the connection [16]. More
notably, however, it is evident that some of the serendipitous
events helped our participants in some less outcome-oriented
ways, but still described as valuable to them. These findings
further support the focus on occasions of micro-serendipity
[5], which were notably present in participants’ diary entries.

5.2

Recommendations

Several key recommendations for designing systems can
be drawn from our exploratory investigation: 1) evidence
suggests that the model of microserendipity is worth following
in design, 2) rich interest profiles are likely to highlight more
potentially serendipitous results, 3) capturing work ‘interests’
may be equally as important as everyday interests, and
4) serendipitous design may be better if focused towards
informational queries.
Future work may wish to focus on the influence of different
design decisions on these encounters, or by integrating other
sources of interest data. Unfortunately, we were not able
to compare a range of possible user interface designs in
our study (e.g. like [19]). Systems like Google, however,
have a notable potential to examine this issue by combining
topical content from +1 data, rather than specific pages,
with search results. Likewise, Bing could examine this issue
using their integration with Facebook. Further, Feegli used
only a relatively simple technique to model and match user
interests, and so much smarter methods, including those
used in prior work, could be used to examine more design
opportunities.

6.

CONCLUSIONS

To investigate naturally occurring serendipity in web search
a technology-probe search engine, Feegli, was deployed that
highlighted Google API search results that related to their
Facebook ‘Like’ data. Feegli was deployed to 14 people to use
as their primary search engine for 7 days. 506 search queries
were made by the user during the diary study and 445 results
were recommended by the search engine as serendipitous.
57 distinct events were found where users clicked on the
serendipitous search results. Whilst generally confirming
empirically grounded models of serendipity [16], the logged
behaviours, and insights from the diary entries, support
Bogers & Bjorneborn’s model of microserendipity [5].

7.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Thanks to our participants, and the support from EPSRC
Grants EP/L019981/1 and EP/M000877/1.

8.

REFERENCES

[1] P. André, J. Teevan, and S. T. Dumais. From x-rays to
silly putty via uranus: serendipity and its role in web
search. In Proc. CHI, pages 2033–2036. ACM, 2009.

942

