Cognitive Activity during Web Search
Md. Hedayetul Islam Shovon1, D (Nanda) Nandagopal1, Jia Tina Du1,
Ramasamy Vijayalakshmi2, and Bernadine Cocks1
1

Cognitive Neuroengineering Laboratory,
School of Information Technology and Mathematical Sciences,
University of South Australia, Adelaide, Australia
2
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computational Sciences,
PSG College of Technology, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India

shomy004@mymail.unisa.edu.au,nanda.nandagopal@unisa.edu.au
dual-task method for assessing mental effort during Web
searching, finding significant differences in user mental effort
between viewing search results and reading contents pages.
Similarly, Gwizdka [5] used dual-task method to demonstrate
dynamic changes in cognitive load in the task stage level of Web
searching, reporting significantly higher average cognitive load
during query formulation. Cole, Gwizdka, Lui and Belkin [6]
further measured dynamic cognitive load during Web searching
using eye movement patterns. They found that cognitive effort
increases as the task difficulty increases. The dual-task method
which is based on users’ performance and reaction time to a
secondary task, does not, however, directly measures brain
activity. Similarly, eye tracking does not measure brain activity
effectively; it is assumed that the captured indicators are closely
related to the nervous system. As previous studies have relied on
these inferential methods, how brain regions connect during
effective Web searching, and which region acts as an information
convergence region or hub remain unknown. Neuroimaging
techniques such as EEG can, however, provide more direct
measures of users’ cognitive activity and recent studies have also
highlighted the potential of neuroscience to contribute in
interactive information retrieval [7]. The current study aims to
capture the dynamic interactions between neuronal elements of
the human brain during Web search task stages by constructing
functional brain networks (FBNs) from time series observations of
EEG signals using NTE [8]. We selected EEG for measuring
cognitive load during Web search interactions because it is an
inexpensive and non-invasive technology with high temporal
resolution, and allows easy setup of a Web search experiment in a
user-friendly environment. The rest of the paper is structured as
follows: Section 2 will discuss the current literature on NTE;
Section 3 will describe the methodology. The discussion of results
will be presented in Sections 4, followed by a brief conclusion and
future research directions in Section 5.

ABSTRACT
Searching on the Web or Net-surfing is a part of everyday life for
many people, but little is known about the brain activity during
Web searching. Such knowledge is essential for better
understanding of the cognitive demands imposed by the search
system and search tasks. The current study contributes to this
understanding by constructing brain networks from EEG data
using normalized transfer entropy (NTE) during three Web search
task stages: query formulation, viewing of a search result list and
reading each individual content page. This study further
contributes to the connectivity analysis of the constructed brain
networks, since it is an advanced quantitative technique which
enables the exploration of brain function by distinct and varied
brain areas. By using this approach, we identified that the
cognitive activities during the three stages of Web searching are
different, with various brain areas becoming more active during
the three Web search task stages. Of note, query formulation
generated higher interaction between cortical regions than
viewing a result list or reading a content page. These findings will
have implications for the improvement of Web search engines and
search interfaces.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Search process

General Terms
Measurement, Design, Experimentation

Keywords
Information seeking; cognitive load; interactive information
retrieval (IIR); EEG; normalized transfer entropy; graph
theoretical analysis

1. INTRODUCTION
Interactive information retrieval is cognitive in nature [1, 2]. To
understand the search process, it is necessary to understand
individual users’ cognitive activity or load during information
interaction [3]. Previous research by Kim and Rieh [4], used the

2. NORMALIZED TRANSFER ENTROPY
Transfer Entropy (TE) is an information theoretical measure
which determines the direction and quantifies the information
transfer between two processes [9]. TE estimates the amount of
activity of a system which is not dependent on its own past
activity but on the past activity of another system. Given two
processes and , the TE from to is shown in equation 1:

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior
specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from
Permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR '15, August 9-13, 2015, Santiago, Chile.
© 2015 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3621-5/15/08…$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2766462.2767784

→

(

=
,

,

,

,

) log

(
(

,
,

, ). ( )
). (
, )

(1)

Here,
denotes the status (value) of signal/system at time ,
denotes the status of signal at time and
denotes the
status of signal at time + 1. Due to the finite size and nonstationarity of data, TE matrices usually contain much noise. In

967

minutes. In the current study, only the EOP data were used for
analysis and comparison with the search related brain activity.

the existing literature, noise/bias has been removed from the
estimate of TE by subtracting the average transfer entropy from
to using shuffled version of denoted by <
→ >,
contains the same symbol as in
over several shuffles.
but those symbols are rearranged in a randomly shuffled order.
The normalized TE is calculated from to with respect to the
total information in sequence
itself. This will represent the
relative amount of information transferred by . The NTE is
shown in equation 2 as follows [10]:
→

=

In equation 2, (
process at time
equation 3.
(

|

→

−<
(

→

|

>

3.2.2 Visual Search (VS) Task (approx. 2 minutes)
In this task, participants were asked to identify a target object
from an array of distractor targets. For example, in Figure 1, the
top red letter is the primary target. The participants would be
required to press ‘y’ if the target is present amongst the black
distractor array, or ‘n’ if the target is absent.

(2)

)

| ) represents the conditional entropy of
+ 1 given its value at time as shown in

)=−

(
,

,

) log

(
(

, )
)

(3)
Figure 1. An example of visual search

NTE is in the range 0 ≤
transfers
→ ≤ 1 . NTE is 0 when
no information to , and is 1 when
transfers maximal
information to . In the present study, the FBNs are constructed
by computing the NTE between EEG channels.

3.2.3 Web Search Task (approx. 5-10 minutes)
The participants were instructed to search information on the Web
based on three provided topic areas. They were free to use any
Web browser (e.g. Internet Explorer, Google Chrome, Mozilla
Firefox) and any search engine (e.g. Google, Yahoo). Participants
were also free to choose the source of information. The search
questions provided for the three different scenarios are given
below:
Scenario 1: Your employer has just told you that he is going to
give you a new company car and asked you to choose one. The
only restrictions are that the car must be red and be reasonably
fuel efficient but it cannot be a European brand.

3. METHODS
3.1 Participants and EEG Data Acquisitions
Ten healthy, right-handed adult (seven males, three females; age
range 22-59) academic/professional staff and students of the
University of South Australia volunteered to participate in this
study. The experiments were conducted at the Cognitive
Neuroengineering Laboratory of the University of South
Australia. All participants reported normal hearing, normal or
corrected-to-normal vision without any history of psychological,
neurological or psychiatric disorders. EEG data were acquired at a
sampling rate of 1000 Hz through a 40 channel Compumedics
Neuroscan Nuamps amplifier using Curry 7 software. Prior to data
collection, each participant was fitted with an appropriate sized 32
channels Quikcap. The 30 electrode sites used were based on the
international 10-20 convention: FP1, FP2, F7, F3, Fz, F4, F8,
FT7, FC3, FCz, FC4, FT8, T3, C3, Cz, C4, T4, TP7, CP3, CPz,
CP4, TP8, T5, P3, Pz, P4, T6, O1, Oz and O2 with the average of
two earlobes (A1, A2) used as the reference. Continuous EEG
data were collected during three different brain states: eyes open
(baseline), visual search and Web search interaction conditions.
All stimulus onsets and participant responses were time-marked
on the EEG record using Compumedics Neuroscan STIM 2
software and with the help of interaction logs from screen capture
software Camtasia Studio.

Scenario 2: While walking in the scrub in the Adelaide Hills you
get bitten by what appears to be a tick. Should you go to the
hospital Emergency Department ASAP? YES/NO and WHY?
Scenario 3: You’ve decided that you want to see a movie at the
cinema. What movie do you decide to see, which session, which
cinema and why?

3.3 EEG Signal Pre-processing
From the collected EEG recordings of ten participants, two were
excluded based on excessive residual artifacts such as muscle
movements. Pre-processing of the remaining eight participants’
EEG data was done by applying 1-70 Hz band pass filter and a
notch filter at 50 Hz. To detect eye blinks, one of the typical eye
blinks was selected by visual inspection and the remaining eye
blinks detected using Curry 7 template matching. These eye blink
artifacts were then removed using principal component analysis
(PCA). Bad blocks were removed manually.

3.2 Cognitive Tasks

3.4 Analysis Framework

Continuous EEG data was recorded while participants undertook
the following computer-based experimental tasks. Stimuli were
presented via STIM software for the first two tasks (i.e. 3.2.1 and
3.2.2 discussed below). For task 3.2.3, participants were provided
with an Internet-connected computer. Users’ Web search
interaction sequences (e.g. mouse and keyboard activity; visited
and bookmarked URLs) were recorded using Camtasia Studio
software.

In the Web search interaction, the tasks were divided into three
subtasks: Query formulation (Q), viewing of search result List (L)
and reading the each individual Content page (C) as shown in
Figure 2. Subtasks were time marked on the EEG signals using
the captured interaction logs (key and mouse strokes) of Camtasia
Studio software, although we did not distinguish between the
subtasks of each individual task. EEG data were then divided into
2 second epochs for each subtask (if greater than 2 seconds).
Those epochs were then averaged for each subtask level to
produce one epoch of averaged data level. In order to compare
search features with the baseline (EOP), 50 chunks of EEG data of
two seconds duration were randomly selected from the EOP data,
and then averaged. Visual search data was also considered as

3.2.1 Eyes Open/Eyes Closed (2 minutes each)
To obtain baseline brain activity in Eyes Open (EOP) state,
participants were asked to stare at a blue color fixation star
comfortably on the STIM computer monitor for 2 minutes. They
were then asked to close their eyes and sit calmly for a further two

968

baseline search activity by making 2 second epochs from the
stimulus onsets, then averaging into a single 2 second averaged
data epoch. Averaged EEG data epoch during EOP, VS, Q, L and
C were then used for the computation of NTE matrices, where
each cell of the NTE matrices represents the NTE value from one
electrode to another. In the case of FBNs, scalp electrodes are
considered as vertices/nodes and the connections/links between
electrodes are measured using NTE [8]. The constructed NTE
matrices were then binarized for the analysis using different types
of complex network metrics. The following complex network

EEG Data Acquisition

Qstart

metrics were used: connectivity density representing the actual
number of edges as a proportion to the total number of possible
edges [11] which is the simplest estimator of physical cost of a
network and basically used to find the global interaction
pattern/magnitude of the network; node degree of directed
network represents the total of incoming and outgoing edges [11]
which is basically used to find hub node/region of a network. The
data, information processing and associated computational steps
are illustrated in Figure 2.

Qend Lstart

Lend Cstart

Cend

Preprocessing

Pre-processed
EEG Signals
Graph Database Construction
during EOP and VS


Creating 2 sec epoch



Creating 2 sec averaged epoch



Computation of NTE

2s averaged epoch (Q)

Preprocessed
EEG
Signals

2 sec epoch
Graph
Database
during L
(NTE)

Graph
Database
during Q
(NTE)

Graph
Database
during C
(NTE)

Complex Network Analysis

Visualization




(Topoplot)

Connectivity Density
Degree Centrality

Figure 2. Transfer Entropy Analysis Framework for Web Search (TEAF-WS)
Connectivity Density

4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
4.1 Connectivity Density
The group averaged connectivity density of different brain states
(EOP, VS, Q, L and C) was calculated and shown in Figure 3. To
calculate the group averaged connectivity density, connectivity
density of each individual participant was calculated then
averaged across participants. As EOP was the baseline cognitive
state, it had the least connectivity density compared to Web search
task stages (Q, L, and C). This suggests that higher connectivity
density during Q, L and, C is directly task related. That Q has
higher connectivity density than L or C further supports this given
that query formulation requires the execution of a number of
simultaneous processes (e.g. defining query terms, viewing search
interface, typing etc.).

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
EOP

VS
Q
Cognitive States

L

C

Figure 3. Connectivity density during different brain states

4.2 Topoplot using Degree Centrality
The group averaged degree centrality of all electrodes for each
brain state was plotted and displayed in Figure 4 using the

969

EEGLAB Topoplot function [12]. Topoplot function visualizes a
topographic map of a scalp data field in a 2-D circular view. To
visualize the subtle variation of degree centrality value in different
brain states, the color map scale of Topoplot was customized such
that a color map scale is used from minimum degree centrality
value to maximum degree centrality value among the degree
centrality value of all the electrodes of all the brain states [12];
thus blue represents the minimum degree centrality value and red
the maximum degree centrality value. Of note, all topoplots
showed clear activity which is reflective of the degree of
engagement for each task; that is, the visual search condition
shows greater engagement than the eyes open condition, while the
list reading condition shows greater engagement than the content
reading condition. In the case of eyes open versus visual search,
this is easily explainable – a visual search task requires focused,
more intense visual attention than simply staring at a fixation star.
Similarly, the button press response requirement of the visual
search task elicited higher activity in motor areas (FCz, Cz, C4)
EOP

VS

than the eyes open condition. The differences between list and
content reading are also explainable, albeit conjecturally, on an
attentional/focus basis; that is, content reading has been “filtered”
via the list process, therefore is focused externally by this process
such that content reading requires less internal focus through
reduced decision-making requirements. Interestingly, the
similarities in processing between the visual search and contents
reading tasks suggest that the two tasks share common cortical
regions in the execution of those tasks. There are, however, some
obvious differences between content and list reading, with list
reading eliciting higher activity at CP4 and TP8 whereas content
reading exhibited higher midline activity at CPz and Pz. However,
in the case of the query formulation task, the high activity is most
likely a reflection of multiple processes contaminating the
averaging process. Further work is currently being conducted to
divide this task into smaller sub-tasks so that movement,
language, decision-making, and attentional processes can be
further delineated during this query formation phase.

Q

L

C

Fp1 Fp2

Fp1 Fp2

Fp1 Fp2

Fp1 Fp2

Fp1 Fp2

F8
F7
F3 Fz F4
FT7 FC3 FCz FC4 FT8
T3 C3 Cz C4 T4
CP3 CPz CP4
TP7
TP8
P3 Pz P4
T5
T6
O1OzO2

F8
F7
F3 Fz F4
FT7 FC3 FCz FC4 FT8
T3 C3 Cz C4 T4
CP3 CPz CP4
TP7
TP8
P3 Pz P4
T5
T6
O1OzO2

F8
F7
F3 Fz F4
FT7 FC3 FCz FC4 FT8
T3 C3 Cz C4 T4
CP3 CPz CP4
TP7
TP8
P3 Pz P4
T5
T6
O1OzO2

F8
F7
F3 Fz F4
FT7 FC3 FCz FC4 FT8
T3 C3 Cz C4 T4
CP3 CPz CP4
TP7
TP8
P3 Pz P4
T5
T6
O1OzO2

F8
F7
F3 Fz F4
FT7 FC3 FCz FC4 FT8
T3 C3 Cz C4 T4
CP3 CPz CP4
TP7
TP8
P3 Pz P4
T5
T6
O1OzO2

0.5719

0.1092

Figure 4. Topoplot during different brain states using degree centrality

5. CONCLUSION
The key contribution of this study is the construction of functional
brain networks using NTE during different stages of Web
searching which enabled detailed investigation of brain function
during Web searching. This study quantitatively identified that
during Web searching the information transfer increases in brain
networks when compared to baseline. This study also
demonstrated that brain activity during different Web search task
stages is not the same. This study may have implications to
examine the effects of cognitive abilities on information search
behaviour/processes and search task performance/outcomes, thus
it could allow an adaptive information retrieval system to better
personalize its interaction with users. Future work will increase
the sample size and consider the effect of task complexity in the
experimental design.

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

6. REFERENCES
[1] Du, J.T.: Cognitive coordinating behaviors in multitasking web
search. Proceedings of the 34th international ACM SIGIR
conference on Research and development in Information
Retrieval, pp. 1117-1118. ACM (2011)
[2] Du, J.T., Spink, A.: Toward a web search model: Integrating
multitasking, cognitive coordination, and cognitive shifts.
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology 62, 1446-1472 (2011)
[3] Scholer, F., Kelly, D., Wu, W.-C., Lee, H.S., Webber, W.: The
effect of threshold priming and need for cognition on relevance
calibration and assessment. Proceedings of the 36th
international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and
development in information retrieval, pp. 623-632. ACM (2013)
[4] Kim, Y.M., Rieh, S.Y.: Dual task performance as a measure for
mental effort in library searching and web searching. In

[9]
[10]

[11]

[12]

970

Proceeding of the 68th Annual Meeting of the American Society
for Information Science & Technology 42 (2005)
Gwizdka, J.: Distribution of Cognitive Load in Web Search.
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology 61, 2167-2187 (2010)
Cole, M.J., Gwizdka, J., Lui, C., Belkin, N.J.: Dynamic
Assesment of Information Acquisition Effort During Interactive
Search. Proceedings of the American Society for Information
Science and Technology 48, 1-10 (2011)
Gwizdka, J., Mostafa, J., Moshfeghi, Y., Bergman, O., Pollick,
F.E.: Applications of neuroimaging in information science:
Challenges and opportunities. Proceedings of the American
Society for Information Science and Technology 50, 1-4 (2013)
Shovon, M.H.I., Nandagopal, D.N., Vijayalakshmi, R., Du, J.T.,
Cocks, B.: Transfer Entropy and Information Flow Patterns in
Functional Brain Networks during Cognitive Activity. In Neural
Information Processing, Lecture Notes in Computer Science
(LNCS 8834), Part I, 1-10 (2014)
Schreiber, T.: Measuring information transfer. Physical review
letters 85, 461-464 (2000)
Gourévitch, B., Eggermont, J.J.: Evaluating information transfer
between auditory cortical neurons. Journal of Neurophysiology
97, 2533-2543 (2007)
Rubinov, M., Sporns, O.: Complex network measures of brain
connectivity: uses and interpretations. Neuroimage 52, 10591069 (2010)
Delorme, A., Makeig, S.: EEGLAB: an open source toolbox for
analysis of single-trial EEG dynamics including independent
component analysis. Journal of neuroscience methods 134, 9-21
(2004).

