SIGIR 2015 General Chair’s Welcome
It is my great pleasure to welcome you to Santiago de Chile, my hometown, and to the 38th
International SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, the
premier annual forum for presentations of research in information retrieval (IR) and related topics.
This five-day event has a broad technical program that we hope you find interesting, useful, and
insightful.
Amazingly, SIGIR 2015 is not only held in my hometown, but also where I did my high school
studies. Could I ever imagine that? No way! So in this venue where I have plenty of mixed
memories, we start the conference on Sunday with nine great tutorials, thanks to Yoelle Maarek;
the Doctoral Consortium, organized by J. Shane Culpepper and Brian Davidson; and we finish the
day with the opening reception in the central patio.
The next three days we have the core of the conference, highlighted with the keynotes by Nick
Belkin (Salton Award) on how we interact with information, and ChengXiang Zhai on game
theory applied to IR. We also have 70 technical papers selected by the program committee chaired
by Mounia Lalmas, Alistair Moffat and Berthier Ribeiro-Neto. Thanks for your great and hard
work! We also have 79 short papers and 12 demos presented in a special session before the
banquet on Tuesday that will be held at a nearby palace on Cerro Santa Lucía. Thanks to Maarten
de Rijke, Ee-Peng Lim and Ryen White for handling the short papers and Djoerd Hiemstra and
Mirella Moro for arranging the demonstrations.
On Wednesday we also have the industry track, SIRIP, organized by Hang Li and Jaime
Teevan. This track combines eight invited talks and four refereed papers. This day we have been
able to keep the number of parallel tracks to just three, and also have the final panel on industry
impact from academia, as a single track event. Finally, on Thursday we have seven interesting
workshops, thanks to the committee chaired by Fernando Diaz and Diane Kelly.
None of this would be possible without the support of the local organizers from four
universities and Yahoo Labs Latin America, all in Santiago. They are Universidad Católica de
Chile, Universidad de Chile, Universidad de Santiago de Chile and Universidad Técnica Federico
Santa María. They are represented by the local arrangements chair, Diego Arroyuelo, the finance
chair, Mauricio Marín, and the website chair, Marcelo Mendoza. Thanks to all of them!
Without financial support, this conference would have been more austere. Thanks to our
supporters, Baidu (platinum); Google, Microsoft Research and Yahoo Labs (gold); eBay (silver);
Facebook, IBM and Yandex (bronze); and Morgan & Claypool, Now and Springer (associated
publishers); we were able to provide many student scholarships, include lunches, and upgrade the
social program. Thanks to Vanessa Murdock and Sergei Vassilvitskii for their great help on this.
Finally, we hope that you share your ideas with other researchers and practitioners, enjoy the
social program, and have time to visit Santiago and other interesting places in this long and
amazing country that is Chile, from the Atacama Desert to the Lake District and the Patagonia
glaciers, always between the Andes Mountains and the Pacific Ocean, without forgetting the navel
of the world, Rapa Nui or Easter Island. Thanks for coming, without you there would be no
SIGIR!

Ricardo Baeza-Yates
SIGIR 2015 General Chair
Yahoo Labs, USA

iii

