Program Chairs’ Preface
Program Chairs' Preface
Welcome to SIGIR 2015, the 38th Annual International ACM-SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, the premier conference in the area. We acknowledge all those who submitted papers to the conference and gave the Program Committee
an opportunity to evaluate their work for potential inclusion in the program. Huge thanks are
owed to the 66 Senior Program Committee Members, 235 Program Committee Members, and
the 41 additional referees, for their dedicated work in evaluating the submissions. That pool of
people spans 32 countries and of the order of 200 institutions.
The conference received 361 submissions in to the full-paper track, a 7% decrease compared
to 2014. Of these, 10 papers were subsequently withdrawn by the authors after having been
noted in an initial vetting process as being unready for review. A number of other submissions
were revised during the same filtering pass to ensure that they were sufficiently anonymized for
the review process. A total of 351 papers then went to review.
As has been customary for many years, SIGIR 2015 employed a two-tier double-blind review
process. Two Senior Program Committee Members (SPCMs) and three Program Committee
Members (reviewers) were assigned to each paper. Once the three reviewers had completed their
evaluations, the Primary SPCM for the paper led a discussion, based on which they wrote a
meta-review that synthesized the range of opinions, and gave an overall evaluation, including (if
required) further commentary based on their own evaluation of the work. The Secondary SPCM
assigned to each paper double-checked the reviews and discussion, and in some cases provided
an additional review. The PC Chairs ranked the submitted papers by the meta-review scores
assigned by the Primary SPCM and Secondary SPCM, and then by the average score of the three
reviewer scores. A Program Meeting was held in San Francisco on 9–10 April, with all of the
Senior Program Committee invited to attend; fourteen of them were able to participate, plus the
three Program Committee Chairs. All papers that could not be categorized as “clear accepts” or
“clear rejects” based on the three first-tier reviews and the Primary SPCM’s meta-review were
discussed at the meeting, and in some cases re-read; and for many of them, further reviews or
commentaries were added to the package of information that was eventually returned to authors.
Reviews and acceptance notifications were emailed to all authors on April 16, four days ahead
of schedule.
This process led to the selection of 70 papers for oral presentation at the conference, a 20%
acceptance ratio, and consistent with the last several years.
A few statistics about the authorship of the 351 papers that were refereed: there were 1,188
author-paper combinations (an average of 3.4 authors per submitted paper) and a total of 944
distinct authors that submitted to the conference (an average of 1.3 submitted papers per author).
One paper had nine coauthors, and two others had eight; only 29 of the submitted papers had
a single author. There were 14 people who were each authors of five or more submissions, and
between them those 14 people accounted for 85 (7%) of the author-paper combinations. Across
the accepted papers, there were 257 author-paper combinations, and 222 distinct authors who
have had papers accepted for presentation at SIGIR 2015.

In terms of country of origin, over the 351 refereed papers there were 261 author-paper
combinations from the USA, 239 from China, 62 from Great Britain, 45 from Australia, and 42
from Singapore. Germany, the Netherlands, Spain, Brazil, and Canada completed the top ten
countries, with a total of 37 different countries represented in the author pool. Amongst the 70
accepted papers, 21 different countries are represented, with the top 10 countries (by authorpaper combinations) being the USA (77), China (38), Great Britain (17), the Netherlands (15),
Spain and Italy (13), Australia, Brazil, Canada and Russia (9). Of the counties listed, Italy, the
Netherlands, Russia, and Spain (in that order) had the highest ratios of successful authors to
submitting authors. Denmark also scored well in this metric, off a smaller number of submitted
author-paper combinations.
Breaking the 351 papers in to seven bands by paper number, which corresponds to forming
groups of 50 papers defined by when the submission process was initiated for each paper, the
numbers of accepted papers in the bands are 9, 9, 7, 6, 12, 11, and 16. Submitting the abstract
close to the deadline seems to help the odds of being accepted; whether this is a significant
outcome we leave for future work.
To summarize the themes of the oral presentations, we made a tag cloud from the 70 full
paper titles using the tool provided at https://www.jasondavies.com/wordcloud/.

We hope that you enjoy the result, and the papers that it represents.
Alistair Moffat, Mounia Lalmas, Berthier Ribeiro-Neto
June 2015.

